Event-Nodes, Texture-Nodes, and Causal Structure:
From State Intervention to Event-Historical Mechanistic Explanation
Flyxion
December 2025
1
Introduction
Recent advances in mechanistic interpretability have emphasized causal reasoning as the criterion
separating genuine understanding from descriptive inspection. Interventions, counterfactuals, and
causal abstractions oﬀer a disciplined way to test whether a hypothesized algorithm is truly
implemented by a system rather than merely correlated with its behavior.
However, standard causalmechanistic approaches remain implicitly state-centric. Interventions
are typically deﬁned as instantaneous value substitutions, and irreversibility enters only through
accidental information loss (e.g. noise or ablation). This essay argues that a minimal extension of
the framework is required to account for history-sensitive structure, irreversible commitments, and
the emergence of constraints that persist beyond any single state.
To this end, we introduce two complementary causal primitives: event-nodes and texture-nodes.
These notions allow causal graphs to represent not only values and pathways, but also the historical
processes and structural textures that shape future behavior.
—
2
Causal Graphs and State-Based Intervention
Let a system be represented as a directed acyclic graph
G = (V, E),
where vertices V correspond to internal variables and edges E represent causal inﬂuence. Traditional
interventions replace the value of a node v ∈V with an externally supplied value v′, breaking
incoming edges while preserving outgoing ones.
This formalism excels at identifying mediating variables and testing necessity or suﬃciency
within a ﬁxed causal structure. However, it treats causal nodes as temporally atomic: values are
swapped, tested, and restored without regard to how those values were produced.
Such a framework can identify paths of inﬂuence, but not paths of becoming.
—
1

3
Event-Nodes
Deﬁnition 1 (Event-Node). An event-node is a causal node whose primary explanatory role is not
the value it holds, but the irreversible constraint it imposes on the system's future admissible states.
Formally, an event-node e ∈E induces a transition
Ft+1 = Ft ∩Φe,
where Φe ⊆S is a constraint set deﬁning which future states remain reachable.
Unlike state variables, event-nodes cannot be fully characterized by their instantaneous values.
Their causal signiﬁcance lies in the reduction of future possibility space. An intervention on an
event-node is therefore not merely a substitution, but a commitment.
This allows irreversibility to be treated as structural rather than accidental. Even if all information
is preserved, an event-node may permanently foreclose certain counterfactual trajectories.
—
4
Texture-Nodes
Deﬁnition 2 (Texture-Node). A texture-node is a causal node that parametrizes the generative
structure of variation within a system, shaping how local perturbations propagate without directly
determining outcomes.
Texture-nodes do not encode discrete decisions or constraints. Instead, they modulate how
behavior is generated. Their role is analogous to material or shader parameters in a three-dimensional
mesh: they do not alter topology, but they determine surface character, continuity, and response to
deformation.
Let N : S ×Θ →S be a noise or variation generator. A texture-node corresponds to a parameter
vector θ ∈Θ such that
st+1 = N(st, θ).
Crucially, θ may itself be the result of prior events. Thus texture-nodes often record ratios,
gradients, or directional biases accumulated over time.
—
5
Analogy: Meshes, Materials, and Generative Noise
Consider a geometric mesh in a modeling environment. The mesh deﬁnes topology; materials deﬁne
appearance. Changing a material does not move vertices, yet it radically alters how light, texture,
and noise interact with the surface.
In this analogy:
• State-nodes correspond to vertex positions.
• Event-nodes correspond to irreversible topology edits.
2

• Texture-nodes correspond to material parameters.
• Noise generators correspond to procedural variation functions.
A texture-node selects a generator function whose output depends on a ratio or vector parameter:
θ = α
β ,
where α and β may represent accumulated gradients, pressures, or historical frequencies. The system
records θ not as a symbolic label, but as a bias shaping future dynamics.
Thus, two systems with identical topology and instantaneous states may diverge due to diﬀering
textures: the same perturbation produces diﬀerent outcomes because the generative ﬁeld diﬀers.
—
6
Counterfactuals Over Futures
Traditional counterfactuals ask:
What would the output have been if this variable had taken a diﬀerent value?
Event- and texture-nodes enable a stronger question:
What futures would still be reachable if this event or texture had been diﬀerent?
Let R(s) denote the reachable future set from state s. An event-level counterfactual compares
R(s | e) to R(s | e′). A texture-level counterfactual compares the shape of R(s) under diﬀerent
generative parameters θ.
This reframes semantic compatibility: a substitution fails not because a value is wrong, but
because it presupposes a future space that no longer exists.
—
7
Causal Abstraction Revisited
A causal abstraction is traditionally validated by interventional equivalence. With event- and
texture-nodes, abstraction gains an additional requirement:
Deﬁnition 3 (Temporal Coherence). A causal abstraction is temporally coherent if it preserves
both interventional outcomes and the irreversibility structure of the underlying system.
An abstraction that predicts reversibility where the system exhibits irreversible settlement is
incomplete, even if its inputoutput behavior matches locally.
This explains why multiple abstractions may coexist: each compresses structure diﬀerently,
preserving certain textures while discarding others.
—
3

8
Failure, Collapse, and Mixture
Failures under intervention are not noise; they are diagnostic. A collapse into incoherence indicates
that a texture-node or event-node essential to generative stability has been disrupted.
Systems that exhibit patchwork behavior under intervention are best understood as mixtures of
event-histories and textures rather than single algorithms. Their apparent inconsistency reﬂects
genuine structural plurality.
—
9
What It Means to Understand
Understanding is not achieved by control alone, nor by prediction in isolation. It consists in
reconstructing:
• the event-nodes that constrain futures,
• the texture-nodes that shape variation,
• and the causal graph that organizes both.
Such understanding is necessarily partial. Texture is lossy under abstraction, and event-history
cannot be fully replayed. But these limitations are principled, not failures.
—
10
Conclusion
By extending causal graphs with event-nodes and texture-nodes, mechanistic interpretability gains
the expressive power to describe irreversible structure, generative variation, and historical constraint
without abandoning causal rigor.
The result is a framework in which mechanisms are not merely paths through a graph, but
histories inscribed into the futurewhere what a system can no longer do is as explanatory as what it
does.
11
Necessary Conditions for Texture-Nodes to Become Event-
Nodes
This section derives conditions under which a variable that initially functions as a texture-node—a
parameter modulating a generative ﬁeld without directly constraining the admissible futures—must
be reclassiﬁed as an event-node, i.e. as a node whose causal signiﬁcance is the irreversible restriction
of future reachable states.
4

11.1
Preliminaries: Reachability and Generative Fields
Let S be the system state space and let RT (s) denote the set of states reachable from s ∈S within
a horizon T ∈N. We assume a one-step update law of the form
st+1 = F(st; θt),
(1)
where θt ∈Θ is a parameter vector. When θt is a texture-node, its intended role is to modulate the
generative ﬁeld (e.g. the noise, smoothness, anisotropy, sparsity, or routing biases) without imposing
hard, history-settling constraints.
To make the modulation explicit, we may decompose
F(s; θ) = G(s) + H(s; θ),
(2)
where G is the "baseline" dynamics and H is the texture-controlled component (which may be
stochastic or deterministic).
Deﬁnition 4 (Texture-Equivalence of Futures). Two parameter values θ, θ′ ∈Θ are texture-
equivalent at horizon T for state s if
RT (s | θ) = RT (s | θ′).
(3)
They are approximately texture-equivalent if the reachable sets are equal up to a speciﬁed tolerance
(e.g. Hausdorﬀdistance or probability mass distance under a stochastic transition kernel).
Under pure texture modulation, changes in θ may alter the measure over futures (which
trajectories are likely), while preserving the support of futures (which trajectories are possible). The
distinction between measure and support is the fulcrum of the event/texture boundary.
11.2
Support Restriction Criterion
Assume the system admits a stochastic kernel representation
st+1 ∼Kθt( · | st),
(4)
so that for any measurable set A ⊆S,
P(st+1 ∈A | st) =
Z
A
Kθt(ds′ | st).
(5)
Deﬁnition 5 (Support of the One-Step Kernel). The support of Kθ(· | s) is the smallest closed set
supp Kθ(· | s) ⊆S with probability one.
Proposition 1 (Necessary Condition: Support Change). If a texture-node value θ is to remain a
pure texture-node (i.e. not an event-node), then for all relevant states s and horizons T, changes in
θ may alter likelihoods but must not remove futures from the reachable support. In particular, it is
5

necessary that
supp Kθ(· | s) = supp Kθ′(· | s)
for all s in the regime of interest.
(6)
Proof. If supp Kθ(· | s) ̸= supp Kθ′(· | s), then there exists a set A such that one parameter value
assigns nonzero probability to transitioning into A while the other assigns zero probability. This
implies a strict inclusion between one-step reachable sets, and therefore a strict inclusion between
T-step reachable sets for some T (at worst T = 1). Hence the parameter change removes admissible
futures and functions as a constraint on reachability, which is the deﬁning role of an event-node.
Intuitively, a texture parameter may act like a material selection that changes surface appearance,
but if it changes the mesh's admissible deformations (e.g. turns a soft body into a rigid body that
cannot bend), then it has become a structural operator and thus an event.
11.3
Irreversibility Criterion via Hysteresis
Even if a parameter does not change one-step support, it may still be event-like if its update law
introduces hysteresis or path dependence.
Assume the texture parameter evolves according to
θt+1 = U(θt, st),
(7)
where U may include thresholding, clipping, quantization, or saturation.
Deﬁnition 6 (Hysteretic Texture Update). The update U is hysteretic on a set Ω⊆Θ × S if there
exist two histories (θ0, s0, . . . , st) and (θ′
0, s′
0, . . . , s′
t) such that (θt, st) = (θ′
t, s′
t) but θt+1 ̸= θ′
t+1.
Proposition 2 (Necessary Condition: No Hysteresis Under State Equivalence). If θ is to remain a
pure texture-node, it is necessary that its update law be non-hysteretic under the state equivalences
used in causal analysis. Concretely, whenever the causal framework treats two situations as equivalent
(e.g. identical activations at the intervention boundary), the texture update must agree:
(θt, st) ∼(θ′
t, s′
t) =⇒U(θt, st) = U(θ′
t, s′
t).
(8)
Proof. If two situations are treated as equivalent by the causal testing protocol but yield diﬀerent
θt+1, then the future reachable sets diverge purely due to untracked historical information. In that
case θ encodes irreducible history, and interventions that only set instantaneous values are insuﬃcient
to restore counterfactual symmetry. The node is therefore functioning as a history-settling operator,
i.e. an event-node.
Hysteresis corresponds to a material parameter whose value depends on how it was reached,
not merely its current numeric value. In procedural shading terms, this is the diﬀerence between
a parameter that selects a noise seed and a parameter that has been permanently baked into a
texture map.
6

11.4
Thresholding and Phase Boundary Condition
Many systems contain sharp boundaries where a continuously varying texture parameter induces a
qualitative shift in reachable structure.
Suppose there exists a scalar summary ρ(θ) (for example, a ratio of two accumulated quantities)
such that the dynamics eﬀectively changes regime when ρ(θ) crosses a threshold ρ∗:
F(s; θ) =



F−(s; θ),
ρ(θ) < ρ∗,
F+(s; θ),
ρ(θ) ≥ρ∗.
(9)
Proposition 3 (Necessary Condition: No Regime-Switching Under Small Perturbations). For θ to
remain texture-like on a regime of interest, it is necessary that small perturbations in θ not induce
regime switching that changes reachable support. In particular, for all (s, θ) in the regime and all
suﬃciently small δ,
RT (s | θ) ≈RT (s | θ + δ)
(10)
in support, not merely in probability.
Proof. If arbitrarily small perturbations can ﬂip the system between distinct transition regimes
whose reachable supports diﬀer, then the parameter acts as a gate selecting among diﬀerent future
constraint families. Such gating is structural and thus event-like.
This is the minimal formal statement of a "phase boundary." Once a texture parameter gates
between distinct dynamical laws, it ceases to be mere texture.
11.5
Recording Criterion: When a Parameter Becomes a Commitment
Your guiding analogy includes that the texture generator depends on a recorded ratio that functions
as a vector parameter for a variable in question. Let
θt = Ψ
at
bt

,
(11)
where at, bt are accumulated quantities (counts, energies, gradients, frequencies) and Ψ maps the
ratio into a vector parameter (direction, scale, anisotropy, routing preference).
If at and bt are merely summaries that can be recomputed from current state, then θt remains
texture-like. If instead at and bt encode irrecoverable history, then θt inherits event-like character.
Proposition 4 (Necessary Condition: Reconstructibility of the Recorded Ratio). If θt is computed
from a recorded ratio at
bt , then a necessary condition for θ to remain a texture-node is that the ratio
be reconstructible from the instantaneous causal boundary used in interventions. That is, there must
exist a function Ξ such that
at
bt
= Ξ(st)
(12)
on the regime of interest (or, in the stochastic case, that its conditional distribution depends only on
st).
7

Proof. If the ratio cannot be reconstructed from the intervention boundary, then two states treated
as identical under the causal protocol may still carry diﬀerent latent ratios, hence diﬀerent θt, hence
diﬀerent future supports or constraints. The parameter then encodes untracked history that cannot
be erased by state-level substitution, making it a commitment variable, i.e. event-like.
In the mesh analogy, reconstructibility corresponds to whether the material choice is a pure
function of current shader inputs, versus a baked selection made earlier in the pipeline that cannot
be inferred from the ﬁnal rendered surface alone.
11.6
Summary: Minimal Necessary Conditions
The boundary between texture-nodes and event-nodes is not metaphysical. It is determined by
reachability, reconstructibility, and irreversibility. A node initially treated as a texture-node must
be promoted to an event-node whenever any of the following necessary conditions fail in the regime
of interest:
1. Support invariance: changing the parameter does not change the support of the transition
kernel (no futures become impossible).
2. No hysteresis: the parameter update does not depend on untracked history under the
equivalences used by intervention tests.
3. No regime gating: small changes in the parameter do not switch the system between distinct
dynamical regimes with diﬀerent reachable supports.
4. Reconstructible recording: any recorded ratio or summary that drives the parameter can
be reconstructed from the causal boundary state (or its conditional distribution depends only
on that boundary state).
When these conditions hold, the parameter behaves as a genuine texture: it reshapes variation
without settling futures. When any condition fails, the parameter is no longer merely a material
choice; it becomes a structural edit to the system's admissible counterfactual space, and therefore
functions as an event-node.
12
Suﬃciency Conditions and the Event-Texture Phase Boundary
The previous section derived necessary conditions under which a texture-node must be promoted
to an event-node. We now derive complementary suﬃciency conditions: conditions under which a
variable can be treated as a genuine texture-node without loss of causal adequacy within a given
regime. Together, these results deﬁne a sharp phase boundary between texture and event structure.
12.1
Texture Suﬃciency via Future-Space Equivalence
Let R∞(s | θ) denote the inﬁnite-horizon reachable future set from state s under parameter θ. While
practical analysis often works at ﬁnite horizons, the conceptual distinction between texture and
event is asymptotic: event-nodes settle futures permanently.
8

Deﬁnition 7 (Future-Space Equivalence Class). Two parameter values θ, θ′ ∈Θ are said to lie in
the same future-space equivalence class on a regime Ω⊆S if
R∞(s | θ) = R∞(s | θ′)
for all s ∈Ω.
(13)
Proposition 5 (Suﬃciency Condition: Asymptotic Equivalence). If a parameter θ varies only
within a single future-space equivalence class on the regime of interest, then θ can be treated as a
texture-node for all causal abstractions restricted to that regime.
Proof. By hypothesis, variations in θ do not alter the set of admissible inﬁnite-horizon futures.
Consequently, no irreversible commitments are introduced by changing θ, and all counterfactual
trajectories remain reachable under replay. Thus θ does not impose structural constraints and
functions purely as a modulator of trajectory selection within a ﬁxed future space, which is precisely
the role of a texture-node.
This formalizes the intuitive notion that texture governs how futures are sampled, not which
futures exist.
12.2
Local Reversibility and Retexturing
A second suﬃciency condition concerns reversibility under intervention.
Deﬁnition 8 (Local Retexturability). A parameter θ is locally retexturable at state s if, for any θ′
in the parameter domain, there exists a ﬁnite sequence of state-level interventions {Ik} such that
(s, θ)
I1,...,In
−−−−→(s′, θ′)
(14)
with R∞(s′) = R∞(s).
Proposition 6 (Suﬃciency Condition: Retexturability). If a parameter is locally retexturable
throughout the regime of interest, then it cannot function as an event-node within that regime.
Proof. Local retexturability guarantees that any value of θ can be imposed without altering the
inﬁnite-horizon future space. Thus no parameter setting constitutes a point of no return. Since
event-nodes are deﬁned by irreversible constraint of futures, a locally retexturable parameter lacks
the deﬁning property of an event-node.
In the mesh analogy, this corresponds to a material parameter that can always be swapped at
render time, never requiring a topology rebuild or geometry bake.
12.3
Texture Stability Under Causal Abstraction
A further suﬃciency condition concerns abstraction itself.
Deﬁnition 9 (Abstraction-Stable Texture). A parameter θ is abstraction-stable if, for every valid
causal abstraction A of the system on the regime of interest, the image of θ under A does not
correspond to an event-node in the abstracted graph.
9

Proposition 7 (Suﬃciency Condition: Abstraction Stability). If a parameter is abstraction-stable
across all abstractions admissible for the intended explanatory task, then treating it as a texture-node
is suﬃcient for mechanistic understanding at that level.
Proof. If no abstraction relevant to the explanatory task requires θ to be represented as an irreversible
constraint, then θ plays no essential role in determining the abstract system's commitment structure.
Representing θ as a texture-node preserves all explanatory distinctions made at that level, and
promoting it to an event-node would add structure without explanatory gain.
This result makes explicit that texture versus event is not an absolute classiﬁcation, but a
level-relative one.
12.4
Phase Boundary Summary
Combining necessary and suﬃciency conditions, we obtain a precise phase boundary:
Remark 1 (Event-Texture Phase Boundary). A causal variable functions as a texture-node on a
regime of interest if and only if:
1. its variation preserves the support of reachable futures,
2. it exhibits no hysteresis under the equivalence relations used by intervention protocols,
3. it does not gate regime changes under small perturbations,
4. any recorded summaries driving it are reconstructible at the causal boundary,
5. its values lie within a single future-space equivalence class,
6. and it is locally retexturable without altering future reachability.
Violation of any of these conditions forces reclassiﬁcation as an event-node for that regime.
The distinction is thus neither metaphysical nor merely descriptive. It is a formal consequence of
how a system partitions its future. Texture governs variation within a future; event governs which
futures remain possible.
This phase boundary provides a principled basis for extending causal mechanistic analysis beyond
instantaneous state substitution to systems whose behavior is shaped by accumulated structure,
recorded ratios, and irreversible settlement.
13
Connection to Spherepop Calculus
The distinction between event-nodes and texture-nodes admits a direct and natural correspondence
with the primitives of Spherepop calculus. This section makes that correspondence explicit and
shows that the extended causal framework developed above can be seen as a semantic realization of
Spherepops operational rules.
10

13.1
Event-Nodes as Pop Operations
In Spherepop calculus, a Pop is deﬁned as an irreversible operation that eliminates a subset of
admissible futures. This is not a change of state in the extensional sense, but a settlement of
possibility.
Event-nodes coincide exactly with this notion.
Formally, let Ht denote the admissible future set at time t. A Spherepop Pop induces a transition
Ht+1 = Ht \ ∆,
(15)
for some nonempty exclusion set ∆.
This is identical to the action of an event-node as deﬁned earlier:
Ft+1 = Ft ∩Φe,
(16)
with Φe = S \ ∆.
Thus:
Event-node ←→Spherepop Pop
Both are characterized by:
• irreversibility,
• future-space restriction,
• and independence from instantaneous representational value.
Crucially, neither requires destructive noise or loss of information. The irreversibility is structural,
not epistemic.
13.2
Texture-Nodes as Spherepop Bind Structure
Spherepop calculus distinguishes Bind operations from Pops. A Bind introduces ordering, depen-
dency, or constraint relations between future actions without eliminating options outright.
Texture-nodes implement exactly this role at the causalmechanistic level.
A texture-node:
• reshapes the generative ﬁeld,
• biases which futures are likely,
• and introduces anisotropy or smoothness,
while preserving the support of admissible futures.
This matches the operational role of Bind:
Ht+1 = Ht,
µt+1 ̸= µt,
(17)
11

where µt is a measure or ordering over Ht.
Thus:
Texture-node ←→Spherepop Bind
The noise-generator analogy ﬁts precisely here. A texture-node selects or modulates a generator
function whose parameters are ratios or vectors recorded from prior activity. These ratios do not
settle futures, but they bias how future trajectories are drawn.
13.3
Recorded Ratios and Spherepop History
In Spherepop calculus, objects and relations exist only insofar as they are introduced by events.
Identity is historical, not extensional.
The recorded ratios driving texture-nodes correspond to derived historical summaries in Sphere-
pop: quantities accumulated from prior pops and binds that shape subsequent dynamics without
constituting new pops themselves.
Let rt = at/bt be a recorded ratio inﬂuencing a texture-node parameter θt = Ψ(rt). In Spherepop
terms:
• at and bt are functions of the event history,
• rt is a historical invariant,
• θt is a derived binding parameter.
When rt is reconstructible from the current causal boundary, the binding remains soft and
replayable. When it is not, the ratio encodes untracked history, and the texture-node must be
promoted to an event-node. In Spherepop terms, a Bind has hardened into a Pop.
This precisely mirrors the necessary-condition results derived earlier.
13.4
Collapse and Spherepop Collapse
Spherepop calculus deﬁnes Collapse as the erasure of historical diﬀerentiation in order to restore
ﬂexibility. This operation discards event records while preserving optionality.
In the causal framework, collapse corresponds to:
• resetting or marginalizing event-nodes,
• erasing recorded ratios,
• restoring symmetry between counterfactual futures.
Importantly, collapse is not the inverse of a pop. It does not recover lost futures; it removes
the record that distinguished them. This aligns with the observation that even after collapse, some
futures may remain inaccessible if the underlying structure has been irreversibly altered.
12

13.5
Causal Abstraction as Spherepop Replay
Spherepop calculus emphasizes replay: the idea that meaning and identity arise from the repro-
ducibility of event histories.
Causal abstraction in the extended mechanistic framework can be understood as replay equiva-
lence:
Two systems are abstractly equivalent if replaying corresponding sequences of pops and
binds yields the same admissible future structure.
Interchange interventions correspond to replaying alternative event sequences under controlled
substitutions. Abstraction validity requires that replay at the abstract level preserves both:
• inputoutput counterfactuals, and
• the structure of irreversible settlement.
This reframes causal abstraction not as pattern matching between graphs, but as compatibility
between event algebras.
13.6
Summary
The correspondence can be summarized succinctly:
Causal Framework
Spherepop Calculus
Event-node
Pop
Texture-node
Bind
Support restriction
Loss of admissible futures
Recorded ratio
Historical invariant
Retexturing
Soft binding
Irreversible promotion
Bind →Pop
Collapse
Collapse
Causal abstraction
Replay equivalence
Viewed this way, the extended causalmechanistic framework is not merely compatible with
Spherepop calculus; it is a concrete instantiation of its event-historical semantics. Event-nodes and
texture-nodes provide the missing bridge between abstract operational rules and empirically testable
causal interventions, grounding Spherepops notions of irreversibility, commitment, and replay in
mechanistic analysis.
14
Categorical and Sheaf-Theoretic Interpretation
The distinction between event-nodes and texture-nodes admits a precise reformulation in categorical
and sheaf-theoretic terms. Doing so clariﬁes both the limits of state-based causal analysis and the
sense in which event-historical structure constitutes genuine additional information rather than mere
13

annotation. In this section, event-nodes are interpreted as categorical operations that alter the base
category of admissible futures, while texture-nodes are interpreted as internal parameterizations
living in the ﬁbers of a sheaf over that base.
14.1
The Category of Admissible Futures
Let Ct denote a category whose objects are admissible future continuations from time t, and whose
morphisms represent valid transitions between such continuations. Composition corresponds to
temporal concatenation. At any given moment, mechanistic analysis typically assumes a ﬁxed Ct,
implicitly treating the space of possible futures as stable under intervention.
An event-node, however, does not merely select an object or morphism within Ct. Instead, it
induces a functor
E : Ct −→Ct+1
that is not essentially surjective. Objects in Ct that are not in the image of E correspond to
futures that have been irrevocably excluded. Irreversibility, in this formulation, is categorical non-
invertibility: there exists no functor E−1 whose composition with E restores the original category
up to equivalence.
This makes precise the sense in which event-nodes are not state updates but changes in the
ambient space of possibility. They act on the indexing category of futures itself.
14.2
Texture-Nodes as Fiberwise Structure
Texture-nodes, by contrast, do not alter the base category Ct. They live in additional structure
carried over it. To formalize this, consider a sheaf F over Ct, where to each object (future) x we
associate a space F(x) of admissible generative parameters. Sections of this sheaf correspond to
coherent assignments of texture across compatible futures.
A texture-node corresponds to the choice of a section (or local section) of F. Changing a
texture-node alters which section is selected, but does not alter the underlying objects of Ct. In
other words, the support of futures remains ﬁxed; only their internal geometry is reshaped.
This sheaf-theoretic perspective makes clear why texture-nodes modulate likelihoods, smoothness,
or anisotropy without settling outcomes. They change the internal structure of ﬁbers while preserving
the base.
14.3
Recorded Ratios as Sections with Memory
The recorded ratios discussed earlier acquire a natural interpretation in this setting. A ratio such as
rt = at/bt determines a parameter θt = Ψ(rt), which in turn selects a local section of F. If the ratio
is reconstructible from the current causal boundary, then the section depends only on local data
and deﬁnes a genuine sheaf section.
If, however, the ratio depends on global historical information that cannot be recovered from the
boundary state, then the would-be section fails the sheaf gluing condition. It is no longer determined
by compatible local data, but by a choice that depends on how those locals were assembled. In
categorical terms, the assignment ceases to be natural.
14

This failure of naturality corresponds exactly to the promotion of a texture-node to an event-node.
The parameter can no longer be treated as living in the ﬁbers of a ﬁxed base category; instead, it
must be reiﬁed as an operation on the base itself.
14.4
Event Promotion as Base Change
The transition from texture-node to event-node can therefore be understood as a change of base.
What was previously modeled as a sheaf F →Ct must now be modeled as a diﬀerent base category
Ct+1 with its own sheaf of textures. The original sheaf does not extend across the event, because
the objects it was deﬁned over no longer exist.
This clariﬁes why no amount of state-level intervention can undo certain eﬀects: once the
base category has changed, interventions that assume the old base are ill-typed. Counterfactual
substitutions fail not because values are incorrect, but because they presuppose morphisms that are
no longer present.
14.5
Causal Abstraction as Functorial Projection
Causal abstraction can now be reformulated as the search for a functor
A : Ct −→D
from the category of admissible futures to a simpler category D representing an abstract algorithm.
Validity of abstraction requires that A commute, up to natural isomorphism, with the event functors
that deﬁne the systems irreversible structure.
In particular, if an abstraction collapses distinctions that are preserved by event functorspredicting
reversibility where the concrete system exhibits categorical collapsethen it fails to be a faithful
representation of the systems temporal structure. This provides a categorical restatement of the
temporal coherence criterion introduced earlier.
14.6
Spherepop Reinterpreted Categorically
Within this formalism, Spherepop calculus emerges as an algebra of base changes and sheaf
reconﬁgurations. Pop operations correspond to non-invertible endofunctors on the category of
futures.
Bind operations correspond to changes of section within a ﬁxed sheaf.
Collapse
corresponds to a quotienting or truncation operation that identiﬁes histories while preserving the
base category.
Replay, ﬁnally, corresponds to functorial equivalence: two histories are meaningfully the same if
they induce equivalent categories of admissible futures together with equivalent sheaves of texture.
14.7
Interpretive Payoﬀ
The categorical and sheaf-theoretic formulation sharpens the central thesis of this work. Mechanistic
understanding is not merely about identifying variables or paths, but about determining which
aspects of a system live in the ﬁbers and which act on the base. Texture is ﬁberwise and replayable;
15

event structure is base-altering and irreversible. Confusing the two leads either to spurious claims
of control or to the false expectation that all mechanisms can be undone by suﬃciently clever
intervention.
By making this distinction explicit, the framework provides a principled bridge between causal
experimentation, event-historical semantics, and abstract mathematical structure, without inﬂating
the ontology beyond what mechanistic analysis strictly requires.
15
Final Synthesis: Mechanism, History, and Texture
The aim of this essay has been to reconcile two perspectives that are often treated as incompatible:
the causalmechanistic program, with its emphasis on intervention and counterfactual control, and
an event-historical view in which irreversibility, commitment, and accumulated structure play an
essential explanatory role. The introduction of event-nodes and texture-nodes provides the minimal
conceptual vocabulary required to unify these perspectives without weakening either.
At the level of causal experimentation, state-based interventions remain indispensable. They
allow one to isolate mediators, trace information ﬂow, and test hypotheses about algorithmic
structure. However, taken alone, such interventions implicitly assume that the space of admissible
futures is ﬁxed and replayable. This assumption holds only within regimes where all relevant
structure is texture-likewhere variation reshapes likelihoods but does not settle possibilities.
Event-nodes mark the precise point at which this assumption fails. They are not distinguished
by dramatic representational change, nor by loss of information, but by a categorical alteration
of what futures remain reachable. Their eﬀects cannot be undone by clever substitution because
they operate at the level of constraints rather than values. In this sense, event-nodes formalize
commitment: they explain why certain counterfactuals are no longer meaningful, not merely why
they are unlikely.
Texture-nodes occupy the complementary role. They encode how variation is generated, how
noise is structured, and how tendencies are biased without foreclosing alternatives. The analogy to
material parameters in a generative mesh is exact: texture changes appearance, smoothness, and
response, but leaves the underlying topology intact. When texture parameters are derived from
recorded ratios or accumulated statistics, they carry history forward in a soft and replayable form.
Only when such recording becomes non-reconstructible or gates regime change does texture harden
into event.
The necessary and suﬃciency conditions derived earlier make this boundary precise. A variable
must be promoted to an event-node exactly when it restricts the support of reachable futures,
introduces hysteresis under the equivalences assumed by intervention, or encodes history that cannot
be erased by state-level replay. Conversely, variables that preserve future-space equivalence, admit
retexturing, and remain ﬁberwise across valid abstractions may be safely treated as texture-nodes
within the relevant regime.
The categorical and sheaf-theoretic reformulation clariﬁes why this distinction is not a matter of
modeling preference. Event-nodes act on the base category of admissible futures, while texture-nodes
live in sheaves over that base. Promotion from texture to event corresponds to a change of base, not
16

merely a reﬁnement of parameters. Abstractions that ignore this distinction may succeed locally yet
fail to respect the temporal coherence of the system they purport to explain.
Seen through this lens, Spherepop calculus is not an external metaphor but an operational
algebra for these distinctions. Pop corresponds to the introduction of event-nodes, Bind to the
modulation of texture, and Collapse to the controlled erasure of historical diﬀerentiation. Causal
abstraction becomes replay equivalence: two systems are equivalent insofar as their sequences of
events and textures induce equivalent categories of futures.
The resulting picture of mechanistic understanding is neither purely state-based nor irreducibly
historical. Understanding consists in determining which aspects of a system are replayable textures
and which are irrevocable events, and in constructing abstractions that preserve this distinction.
What a system can no longer do is as much a part of its mechanism as what it does.
This synthesis suggests a natural stopping point for mechanistic explanation. Beyond this
boundary, further detail does not yield deeper understanding but merely ﬁner texture. Within it,
causal intervention, event history, and mathematical structure align to provide a coherent account
of how systems compute, commit, and constrain their own futures.
A
Appendix: Implementing Spherepop Operators in Forth
This appendix sketches a concrete implementation strategy for Spherepop operators in a small,
inspectable Forth system. The design goal is not to build a complete runtime, but to demonstrate
that Spherepops event-historical semantics can be realized as a minimal stack language where every
operation either (i) records an irreversible event, (ii) introduces replayable structural binding, or
(iii) collapses historical diﬀerentiation. Forth is particularly well-suited because it makes evaluation
order explicit, keeps state small and visible, and encourages dictionary-driven extension.
A.1
Representation Strategy
A Spherepop system is most naturally represented as two coupled structures. The ﬁrst is a persistent
event log whose entries are the primitive operations (Pop, Bind, Merge, Link, Collapse). The
second is a derived present state computed from replaying some preﬁx (or a compressed summary)
of the log. In practice, a Forth implementation keeps both: the event log provides semantic ground
truth, while the derived state provides eﬃcient execution.
We assume a simple model in which objects are integer identiﬁers. Each object has an associated
parent pointer or part-of relation, plus optional metadata. The semantics of part-of can be built as
a union-ﬁnd variant (for merge-like operations) supplemented by additional relations (for link-like
operations). The essential Spherepop requirement is that these relations are not treated as axiomatic;
they exist only insofar as they are generated by recorded events.
A.2
Forth Data Structures
We implement a small heap using arrays. The details can be varied across Forth systems; the
following style is compatible with common ANS Forth conventions.
We represent:
17

1. a monotonically increasing object counter,
2. an event log with ﬁxed-width records,
3. parent/representative arrays for merge semantics,
4. an optional adjacency list region for link semantics.
The event log records a tag and up to three integer ﬁelds. The tag determines interpretation.
This deliberately mirrors the idea that the log is authoritative, and the present state is derived.
\ ----------------------------
\ Core storage sizes
\ ----------------------------
10000 CONSTANT MAX-OBJ
20000 CONSTANT MAX-EVT
\ ----------------------------
\ Object allocator
\ ----------------------------
VARIABLE NEXT-ID
\ ----------------------------
\ Union-Find parent + rank
\ ----------------------------
CREATE PARENT MAX-OBJ CELLS ALLOT
CREATE RANK
MAX-OBJ CELLS ALLOT
\ ----------------------------
\ Event log: (tag a b c) per event
\ tag is a small integer
\ ----------------------------
VARIABLE EVT#
CREATE EVT-TAG MAX-EVT CELLS ALLOT
CREATE EVT-A
MAX-EVT CELLS ALLOT
CREATE EVT-B
MAX-EVT CELLS ALLOT
CREATE EVT-C
MAX-EVT CELLS ALLOT
A.3
Initialization and Allocation
Initialization clears counters and sets each object to be its own parent.
: INIT ( -- )
0 NEXT-ID !
0 EVT# !
18

;
: NEW ( -- id )
NEXT-ID @ DUP 1+ NEXT-ID !
DUP CELLS PARENT + !
\ parent[id] = id
0 OVER CELLS RANK + !
\ rank[id] = 0
;
The word NEW implements the creation of a fresh entity. In a strict event-historical reading,
creation itself is an event and should be logged. One can therefore deﬁne POP (below) to include
allocation, or deﬁne NEW as a convenience word that calls POP with a distinguished tag.
A.4
Event Logging
We deﬁne a helper word that appends a record to the event log.
: LOG-EVT ( tag a b c -- )
EVT# @ DUP
>R
CELLS EVT-TAG + !
R@ CELLS EVT-A
+ !
R@ CELLS EVT-B
+ !
R> CELLS EVT-C
+ !
EVT# @ 1+ EVT# !
;
This realizes the fundamental Spherepop thesis that semantics should be sourced from events.
Every operator below calls LOG-EVT.
A.5
Union-Find Core for Merge
A minimal Merge can be implemented by union-ﬁnd. This yields an eﬃcient derived part-of
structure while the authoritative meaning remains in the log.
: FIND ( x -- root )
DUP CELLS PARENT + @ OVER = IF EXIT THEN
DUP CELLS PARENT + @ RECURSE
DUP ROT CELLS PARENT + !
;
: UNION ( x y -- )
FIND SWAP FIND
2DUP = IF 2DROP EXIT THEN
\ union by rank
19

2DUP CELLS RANK + @ SWAP CELLS RANK + @
2DUP < IF \ rank[x] < rank[y]
DROP SWAP \ ensure first has >= rank
ELSE DROP THEN
\ now: xRoot yRoot with rank[x]>=rank[y]
OVER CELLS PARENT + !
\ parent[yRoot] = xRoot
\ if ranks equal, increment rank
2DUP CELLS RANK + @ SWAP CELLS RANK + @ = IF
OVER CELLS RANK + DUP @ 1+ SWAP !
THEN
2DROP
;
A.6
Spherepop Operators as Forth Words
We now deﬁne Spherepop operators. The semantics here are intentionally minimal and should
be read as a reference architecture rather than a completed theory. The key feature is that every
operator both (i) performs a derived-state update and (ii) logs itself as an event for replay.
A.6.1
Pop
A Pop is an irreversible event that introduces a new object and thereby changes the future space by
committing to a new historical fact: the object exists and can be referred to. One may also interpret
Pop as a commitment that excludes certain future histories in which the object did not exist.
1 CONSTANT TAG-POP
: POP ( -- id )
NEW DUP 0 0 0
TAG-POP ROT ROT ROT LOG-EVT
;
The particular record ﬁelds are unused here; in richer variants, Pop may attach provenance or a
parent context.
A.6.2
Bind
A Bind introduces ordering or dependency without removing options. In a minimal implementation,
Bind can be represented as a constraint edge in a separate structure (e.g. a dependency graph),
while leaving the union-ﬁnd structure untouched. For compactness, we log it and omit derived
enforcement; the essential point is the event-historical record.
2 CONSTANT TAG-BIND
20

: BIND ( a b -- )
\ meaning: a must precede b, or a constrains b
0 TAG-BIND ROT ROT 0 LOG-EVT
;
A full implementation would maintain a constraint graph and enforce acyclicity or other
admissibility criteria. The present deﬁnition demonstrates the operational encoding: binding is
recorded and therefore participates in replay.
A.6.3
Merge
A Merge identiﬁes two objects into a common equivalence class. In the derived state, this is
union-ﬁnd; in the log, it is a recorded event.
3 CONSTANT TAG-MERGE
: MERGE ( a b -- )
2DUP UNION
0 TAG-MERGE ROT ROT 0 LOG-EVT
;
A.6.4
Link
A Link introduces a relation between objects without identifying them. This can be modeled as an
adjacency list or as a set of labeled edges. Again we log the event and supply a minimal derived
mechanism.
Here we assume a ﬁxed-size edge store. The representation can be improved, but the essential
semantics are: link is explicit, replayable, and historically grounded.
4 CONSTANT TAG-LINK
100000 CONSTANT MAX-LINK
VARIABLE LNK#
CREATE LNK-FROM MAX-LINK CELLS ALLOT
CREATE LNK-TO
MAX-LINK CELLS ALLOT
: LINK-ADD ( a b -- )
LNK# @ DUP >R
R@ CELLS LNK-FROM + !
R> CELLS LNK-TO
+ !
LNK# @ 1+ LNK# !
;
: LINK ( a b -- )
2DUP LINK-ADD
21

0 TAG-LINK ROT ROT 0 LOG-EVT
;
A.6.5
Collapse
A Collapse discards historical diﬀerentiation while preserving ﬂexibility. Operationally, collapse is
best understood as log compression: replace a detailed preﬁx of events with a summary that yields
the same derived state for the purposes of future evolution, while erasing the ﬁne-grained historical
distinctions.
In Forth, the simplest demonstration is to reset the log to a checkpoint while retaining the
derived structures. This does not undo the derived constraints; it forgets the path by which they
were achieved. More sophisticated collapse can store a digest event that records only invariants.
5 CONSTANT TAG-COLLAPSE
VARIABLE EVT-CUT
: CHECKPOINT ( -- )
EVT# @ EVT-CUT !
;
: COLLAPSE ( -- )
\ Forget events prior to EVT-CUT by truncation.
\ Derived state is kept; only historical detail is removed.
EVT-CUT @ EVT# !
0 0 0 TAG-COLLAPSE 0 0 0 LOG-EVT
;
The call to LOG-EVT after truncation functions as a marker indicating that a collapse occurred.
In a richer system, the collapse record would contain a hash of the retained derived state or a
canonical summary of invariants.
A.7
Replay and Veriﬁcation
Replay is central to Spherepop semantics. In this implementation, replay means resetting the
derived state and reapplying the event log to reconstruct the present. The following word replays
events, interpreting each tag.
: RESET-DERIVED ( -- )
\ Reset union-find for all allocated objects.
NEXT-ID @ 0 DO
I DUP CELLS PARENT + !
0 I CELLS RANK + !
LOOP
0 LNK# !
22

;
: EVT@ ( i -- tag a b c )
DUP CELLS EVT-TAG + @
OVER CELLS EVT-A
+ @
OVER CELLS EVT-B
+ @
SWAP CELLS EVT-C
+ @
;
: APPLY ( tag a b c -- )
\ interpret a single event
>R >R >R \ stash c b a
CASE
TAG-POP OF \ pop: nothing to do; object already allocated in this toy model
R> R> R> DROP DROP DROP
ENDOF
TAG-BIND OF
R> R> R> DROP DROP DROP
ENDOF
TAG-MERGE OF
R> R> SWAP R> DROP \ a b c -> a b
UNION
ENDOF
TAG-LINK OF
R> R> SWAP R> DROP
LINK-ADD
ENDOF
TAG-COLLAPSE OF
R> R> R> DROP DROP DROP
ENDOF
ENDCASE
;
: REPLAY ( -- )
RESET-DERIVED
EVT# @ 0 DO
I EVT@ APPLY
LOOP
;
This replay mechanism exhibits the intended separation: the log is the semantic authority and
the derived structures are reconstructions. As written, Pop does not allocate during replay; a strict
23

version would log allocation and reallocate in replay, or store object counts as part of a checkpoint
event. The point is architectural: there is a canonical history and a derived present.
A.8
Event-Nodes and Texture-Nodes in Forth Terms
Within this implementation, event-nodes correspond to log entries whose replay changes the
admissible future space. Pop and Merge are event-like because they introduce new referents
or collapse referents irreversibly in the future algebra. Collapse is also event-like, though of a
diﬀerent kind: it changes the space of counterfactual explanation by erasing distinctions.
Texture-nodes correspond to parameters that alter generative behavior without changing what
is admissible in principle.
In Forth, these are naturally modeled as variables that aﬀect the
interpretation of subsequent events or the stochasticity/heuristics by which new events are proposed,
while leaving replay equivalence intact. The most faithful implementation strategy is therefore to
treat texture as ﬁberwise metadata: recorded ratios, seeds, and generator parameters that can be
changed without altering the set of admissible histories, so long as they satisfy the reconstructibility
and support-preservation conditions derived earlier.
A.9
Remarks on Safety and Minimality
This appendix intentionally avoids dynamic code generation, self-modifying deﬁnitions, or arbitrary
memory writes. Forth makes such techniques possible, but Spherepops semantic commitment
is stronger when the only authoritative structure is the event log and its replay. The minimal
implementation therefore prefers explicit records and replayable interpreters, because these preserve
the intended distinction between structural history and derived present state.
In this sense, Forth serves as an existence proof: Spherepop operators can be realized in a
compact, transparent substrate where mechanistic inspection is straightforward and where the
semantics of irreversibility are expressed as literal log structure rather than as implicit side eﬀects.
B
Appendix: Implementing Spherepop Operators in Haskell
This appendix provides a Haskell implementation sketch for Spherepop operators analogous in spirit
to the preceding Forth appendix. The guiding design constraint is that the systems semantics be
event-sourced: the event log is authoritative, while the present state is a derived object obtained by
replay or by replay-equivalent compression. The implementation therefore separates (i) the type of
events, (ii) an interpreter (replay function) from events to state, and (iii) a small API of Spherepop
operators that append to the log.
The code below is intentionally minimal and intended as a reference architecture. It is designed
to be readable, auditable, and compatible with pure functional reasoning. Performance and storage
layout can be improved later without changing the semantic core.
24

B.1
Core Types: Objects, Events, and Histories
We represent objects as integer identiﬁers. A history is a list of events. The event type is explicit
and closed; this is the key to keeping semantics inspectable.
{-# LANGUAGE DeriveGeneric #-}
module Spherepop where
import GHC.Generics (Generic)
import Data.Map.Strict (Map)
import qualified Data.Map.Strict as M
import Data.Set (Set)
import qualified Data.Set as S
-- | Object identifiers.
newtype Obj = Obj { unObj :: Int }
deriving (Eq, Ord, Show, Generic)
-- | Spherepop events. The log is authoritative.
data Event
= Pop Obj
| Bind Obj Obj
| Merge Obj Obj
| Link Obj Obj
| Collapse Checkpoint
deriving (Eq, Show, Generic)
-- | A checkpoint can be as small as a log index plus an optional digest.
data Checkpoint = Checkpoint
{ cutIndex :: Int
, digest
:: Maybe String
} deriving (Eq, Show, Generic)
-- | A history is a sequence of events.
newtype History = History { unHistory :: [Event] }
deriving (Eq, Show, Generic)
B.2
Derived State
A derived state is an interpretation of the history. We implement a minimal state consisting of
a union-ﬁnd style representative map for merges, a set of links, and an optional set of binding
constraints. Bind constraints are recorded as data; enforcing them (e.g. checking acyclicity) can be
25

layered on later.
-- | Representative mapping for Merge semantics.
-- Invariant: rep[x] is the chosen representative for x's class.
type Rep = Map Obj Obj
-- | Link relation as a set of directed edges.
type Links = Set (Obj, Obj)
-- | Bind constraints as a set of directed edges (ordering or dependency).
type Binds = Set (Obj, Obj)
data State = State
{ reps
:: Rep
, links :: Links
, binds :: Binds
, next
:: Int
} deriving (Eq, Show)
emptyState :: State
emptyState = State
{ reps
= M.empty
, links = S.empty
, binds = S.empty
, next
= 0
}
The ﬁeld next provides fresh identiﬁers. In a strict event-historical semantics, allocation should
itself be recorded as an event. We do so by ensuring that pop constructs the fresh object and records
it explicitly.
B.3
Union-Find Operations
For minimality, we implement a simple representative-chasing find operation with path compression.
Union chooses the representative deterministically.
findRep :: Rep -> Obj -> Obj
findRep r x =
case M.lookup x r of
Nothing -> x
Just p
->
let root = findRep r p
in root
26

compress :: Rep -> Obj -> Rep
compress r x =
case M.lookup x r of
Nothing -> r
Just p
->
let root = findRep r p
in M.insert x root r
unionRep :: Rep -> Obj -> Obj -> Rep
unionRep r a b =
let ra = findRep r a
rb = findRep r b
in if ra == rb
then r
else
-- deterministically pick smaller Obj as representative
let rep = min ra rb
sub = max ra rb
r'
= M.insert sub rep r
in compress (compress r' a) b
B.4
Replay Semantics: Interpreting Events
Replay is the semantic heart: given a history, compute the derived state. This function is pure and
therefore mechanically checkable. In particular, any two histories that replay to the same state are
equivalent at the chosen level of derived representation.
apply :: Event -> State -> State
apply ev st =
case ev of
Pop o ->
-- Ensure the object exists in reps map (optional) and advance allocation.
st { reps = M.insertWith (\_ old -> old) o o (reps st) }
Bind a b ->
st { binds = S.insert (a,b) (binds st) }
Merge a b ->
st { reps = unionRep (reps st) a b }
Link a b ->
27

st { links = S.insert (a,b) (links st) }
Collapse cp ->
-- Collapse is handled at the history level; apply is a no-op here.
-- We still record its existence in the log, and replay interprets it
-- as a truncation marker when requested.
st
replay :: History -> State
replay (History evs) =
foldl (flip apply) emptyState evs
The Collapse event is intentionally treated as a semantic instruction about the history rather
than as a state mutation. This mirrors the idea that collapse erases historical diﬀerentiation while
preserving the derived present.
B.5
Collapse as Log Compression
We implement collapse as truncation to a checkpoint index followed by insertion of a Collapse
marker. More sophisticated implementations can replace the truncated preﬁx with a digest event
that stores canonical invariants.
collapse :: Checkpoint -> History -> History
collapse cp (History evs) =
let k
= max 0 (min (cutIndex cp) (length evs))
evs' = take k evs
in History (evs' ++ [Collapse cp])
If one prefers that collapse preserve derived state exactly while discarding path detail, then the
checkpoint should be taken at a point where replayed state is already acceptable as a canonical
summary. Alternatively, one can store a digest that commits to a particular derived state and treat
the digest as an event-node in the sense of the main text.
B.6
Spherepop Operators as an API
We now deﬁne a small API that maintains a history and a derived state in a single structure. In
practice, the derived state is optional because it can always be recomputed from replay, but keeping
it avoids repeated folds.
data World = World
{ hist
:: History
, state :: State
} deriving (Eq, Show)
28

emptyWorld :: World
emptyWorld = World (History []) emptyState
append :: Event -> World -> World
append ev (World (History evs) st) =
let st' = apply ev st
in World (History (evs ++ [ev])) st'
-- | POP allocates a new object and records it.
pop :: World -> (Obj, World)
pop (World h st) =
let o
= Obj (next st)
st' = st { next = next st + 1 }
w'
= append (Pop o) (World h st')
in (o, w')
bind :: Obj -> Obj -> World -> World
bind a b = append (Bind a b)
merge :: Obj -> Obj -> World -> World
merge a b = append (Merge a b)
link :: Obj -> Obj -> World -> World
link a b = append (Link a b)
-- | COLLAPSE compresses history at the log level, then rebuilds derived state.
collapseWorld :: Checkpoint -> World -> World
collapseWorld cp (World h _) =
let h'
= collapse cp h
st' = replay h'
in World h' st'
This API makes explicit what the event-historical semantics demands: all meaningful changes
are events, and the present is derived. The only non-eventful change above is next, the allocator
counter; this is an implementation detail. If allocation must itself be replayable from events, then
the allocator counter should be computed from the history (e.g. by counting Pop events), and
State.next can be removed.
B.7
Event-Nodes and Texture-Nodes as Types
The main body of the essay distinguishes event-nodes from texture-nodes. In the Haskell setting,
the distinction becomes a typing discipline: events are logged and replayable, while textures are
parameters used by interpreters that modulate behavior without changing admissible futures.
29

A minimal way to represent this is to parameterize the interpreter by a texture record. Texture
does not appear in the history; it appears in the semantics of how events are interpreted or proposed.
data Texture = Texture
{ noiseSeed
:: Int
, ratioParam :: Double
} deriving (Eq, Show)
-- An interpreter that is allowed to consult texture.
applyWithTexture :: Texture -> Event -> State -> State
applyWithTexture _ ev st =
apply ev st
In the simplest case, texture is irrelevant to replay, and therefore has no eﬀect on admissible
futures; it merely aﬀects how new events are generated. In richer systems, texture may modulate
stochastic proposals, heuristic selection of merges, or prioritization of links. The necessary and
suﬃcient conditions derived earlier then become properties of applyWithTexture: if varying
Texture changes reachability support or introduces hysteresis not reconstructible at the causal
boundary, the texture must be promoted into the event log as an event-node.
B.8
A Small Worked Example
example :: World
example =
let (a,w1) = pop emptyWorld
(b,w2) = pop w1
w3
= link a b w2
w4
= merge a b w3
w5
= bind a b w4
w6
= collapseWorld (Checkpoint 3 Nothing) w5
in w6
The example demonstrates the intended separation. Events are appended, replay reconstructs,
and collapse truncates history while preserving a derived present. The meaning of the system is the
history; the state is its current projection.
B.9
Remarks on Extensibility
This Haskell design is deliberately conservative. It favors explicit event types and a single interpreter
rather than embedding Spherepop semantics into an opaque monad. Nevertheless, it scales naturally.
One can add typed variants, invariants, and proof-carrying summaries by reﬁning the Event type and
the replay function. One can also add categorical structure by interpreting histories as morphisms in
a free category generated by events, with replay providing a functor into a concrete state category.
30

Finally, one can implement sheaf-like texture structure by treating Texture as a ﬁberwise assignment
whose gluing conditions correspond to reconstructibility constraints.
In all cases, the central Spherepop principle is preserved: the authoritative meaning is an event
history, and the operational present is a derived, replayable projection of that history.
C
Appendix: Implementing Spherepop Operators in Racket
This appendix presents a Racket implementation sketch of Spherepop operators parallel to the
Forth and Haskell appendices. The architectural constraint is again event-sourcing: the event log is
the semantic authority, while any "current state" is a derived projection obtained by interpreting
(replaying) that log. Racket is well-suited for this because it provides algebraic data via structs,
persistent maps/sets, and a macro system for building a compact surface syntax without changing
the underlying semantics.
C.1
Core Representation
We represent objects as integers. Events are represented as transparent structs so that they are
printable and inspectable. A history is a list of events. The derived state is a record containing
representative mappings (for merge), link edges, bind constraints, and an allocation counter. As
in the other appendices, the allocation counter may be eliminated if one insists that allocation be
computed solely from the history; it is kept here to keep the operational API simple.
#lang racket
(require racket/set
racket/match)
;; ----------------------------
;; Events
;; ----------------------------
(struct pop
(id)
#:transparent)
(struct bind
(a b)
#:transparent)
(struct merge
(a b)
#:transparent)
(struct link
(a b)
#:transparent)
(struct collapse (cut digest) #:transparent)
;; A history is a list of events.
;; (listof (U pop bind merge link collapse))
;; ----------------------------
;; Derived State
31

;; ----------------------------
(struct state (reps links binds next) #:transparent)
(define empty-state
(state (hash) (set) (set) 0))
C.2
Union-Find Style Representatives
We implement a representative map for merges. This is a minimal union-ﬁnd variant expressed in
purely functional style. The representative of an object is obtained by chasing pointers in a hash
map. Path compression can be added, but the minimal version suﬃces for semantic clarity.
(define (find-rep reps x)
(define p (hash-ref reps x #f))
(if (or (not p) (= p x))
x
(find-rep reps p)))
(define (union-rep reps a b)
(define ra (find-rep reps a))
(define rb (find-rep reps b))
(cond [(= ra rb) reps]
[else
(define rep (min ra rb))
(define sub (max ra rb))
(hash-set reps sub rep)]))
C.3
Replay Semantics
Replay interprets a history as a fold over events. This gives a canonical meaning to a history: two
histories are equivalent at the derived level if replay yields the same state (or the same invariants of
state).
Collapse is treated as a history-level operation rather than a state mutation. In the replay
function we therefore ignore collapse events, except insofar as they are used as markers in separate
compression procedures.
(define (apply-event ev st)
(match ev
[(pop id)
(define reps (state-reps st))
(define reps* (if (hash-has-key? reps id)
reps
32

(hash-set reps id id)))
(struct-copy state st [reps reps*])]
[(bind a b)
(struct-copy state st [binds (set-add (state-binds st) (cons a b))])]
[(merge a b)
(struct-copy state st [reps (union-rep (state-reps st) a b)])]
[(link a b)
(struct-copy state st [links (set-add (state-links st) (cons a b))])]
[(collapse _ _)
st]))
(define (replay hist)
(for/fold ([st empty-state])
([ev (in-list hist)])
(apply-event ev st)))
C.4
History-Level Collapse (Compression)
Collapse is deﬁned as erasing historical diﬀerentiation while preserving the derived present. Op-
erationally, the minimal implementation truncates the log to a cut index and appends a collapse
marker. A more faithful implementation would replace the truncated preﬁx with a digest event
encoding canonical invariants. The digest ﬁeld is included for that purpose, even if unused here.
(define (collapse-history hist cut [digest #f])
(define cut* (max 0 (min cut (length hist))))
(append (take hist cut*)
(list (collapse cut* digest))))
C.5
World API: Event-Sourcing with Derived Cache
As in the other appendices, we provide a world record containing both history and a cached derived
state. Every operator appends an event and updates the cache by interpreting that single event.
Collapse rebuilds the cache by replaying the compressed history, reﬂecting the idea that collapse is
a history transformation rather than an ordinary state transition.
(struct world (hist st) #:transparent)
(define empty-world
(world '() empty-state))
33

(define (append-event w ev)
(define hist* (append (world-hist w) (list ev)))
(define st*
(apply-event ev (world-st w)))
(world hist* st*))
(define (POP w)
(define id (state-next (world-st w)))
(define st* (struct-copy state (world-st w) [next (add1 id)]))
(define w*
(world (world-hist w) st*))
(values id (append-event w* (pop id))))
(define (BIND w a b)
(append-event w (bind a b)))
(define (MERGE w a b)
(append-event w (merge a b)))
(define (LINK w a b)
(append-event w (link a b)))
(define (COLLAPSE w cut [digest #f])
(define hist* (collapse-history (world-hist w) cut digest))
(world hist* (replay hist*)))
C.6
Texture Parameters as Fiberwise Semantics
The main essay distinguishes event-nodes from texture-nodes. In this Racket realization, the minimal
way to express that distinction is to keep textures out of the history and instead treat them as
parameters of interpretation or of event proposal. That is, textures are not logged events; they are
ﬁberwise metadata that modulate generative behavior without changing admissible futures, unless
they violate the support-preservation and reconstructibility conditions derived in the main text.
One can express this by extending the interpreter to consult a texture record when applying
events, or by making event-proposal functions depend on textures.
(struct texture (seed ratio) #:transparent)
(define default-texture
(texture 0 1.0))
(define (apply-event/texture tex ev st)
;; In the simplest form, texture does not affect replay semantics at all.
34

;; More elaborate versions can allow texture to bias heuristic choices,
;; while remaining fiberwise if it preserves future support.
(apply-event ev st))
If texture begins to gate regime changes, introduce hysteresis not reconstructible from the causal
boundary, or change the reachable support, then it can no longer be treated as a mere parameter;
it must be promoted into the event log as an event-node, for instance by introducing a new event
constructor such as (set-texture tex) and replaying it as part of the authoritative history.
C.7
A Small Worked Example
(define (example)
(define-values (a w1) (POP empty-world))
(define-values (b w2) (POP w1))
(define w3 (LINK w2 a b))
(define w4 (MERGE w3 a b))
(define w5 (BIND w4 a b))
(define w6 (COLLAPSE w5 3))
w6)
(example)
The example illustrates the intended semantics. All meaning-bearing actions are events appended
to a log. Replay reconstructs the present. Collapse compresses history while preserving a derived
state. The design is deliberately explicit: every important object is a plain struct, and every semantic
transformation is a total function over histories.
C.8
Macro Surface Syntax (Optional)
Racket permits a compact surface syntax without changing the semantic model. One can introduce
syntactic forms that expand into calls to POP, BIND, MERGE, LINK, and COLLAPSE. This provides an
ergonomic "Spherepop script" language while retaining the same replay semantics. The macro layer
is intentionally omitted here to keep the appendix focused on the semantic core, but the presence of
transparent event structs makes such a layer straightforward: a macro expands into event-appending
calls, and the log remains the canonical source of truth.
In this sense, the Racket implementation serves the same purpose as the Forth and Haskell
sketches: it demonstrates that Spherepop operators are not merely philosophical primitives but
can be realized as a small, inspectable, replayable event calculus in a conventional programming
environment.
35

