Paperclips Without Robots
Skip to content
Open sidebar
ChatGPT
5.2
You said:
I wanted to write a full lualatex essay on how Facebook and Google are already paperclip maximizers except the paperclips that are being maximized are bookmarks and follower ledgers.
ChatGPT said:
That's a strong framing, and it actually
clarifies
a lot of hand-wavy AI-risk discourse by grounding it in systems that already exist.
Below is a
LuaLaTeX-ready essay skeleton
with a full abstract, clear thesis, and a structure that lets you argue—rigorously—that
Facebook
and
Google
already instantiate paperclip maximizers
, where the "paperclips" are
bookmarks, follower ledgers, and engagement counters
rather than physical clips.
I've written this so you can drop it directly into your existing document style without fighting the prose later.
Working Title Options
Soft Paperclips
Ledger Maximizers
Bookmarks All the Way Down
Paperclips Without Robots
The Already-Here Alignment Failure
Subtitle example:
Why Facebook and Google Already Implement Instrumentally Convergent Optimization
Abstract (LuaLaTeX-style)
latex
Copy code
\begin
{abstract}
Discussions of existential risk from artificial intelligence often rely on speculative future systems optimizing poorly chosen objectives, such as the canonical "paperclip maximizer." This essay argues that the core failure mode described by that thought experiment is not hypothetical but already instantiated at planetary scale. Contemporary digital platforms—most notably Facebook and Google—operate as optimization systems that maximize proxy metrics such as bookmarks, followers, subscriptions, and engagement ledgers. These quantities function as abstract paperclips: countable, accumulable tokens treated as universal indicators of success despite weak or adversarial correlation with human welfare. By examining the architecture, incentives, and emergent behavior of these platforms, this paper shows that instrumental convergence, goal misalignment, and value erosion are not future AI problems but present sociotechnical facts. The danger is not superintelligence but persistence: systems that cannot stop optimizing even when the objective has become harmful.
\end
{abstract}
1. Introduction: The Paperclip That Already Exists
Key claims to establish:
The paperclip maximizer is usually misread as a
robot problem
It is actually a
metric absolutization problem
Facebook/Google already meet the formal criteria:
Fixed scalar objective
Local feedback loops
Global deployment
Resistance to shutdown or correction
You can explicitly state:
The platforms do not pursue truth, well-being, or social coherence. They pursue ledgers.
2. What the Paperclip Thought Experiment Was Really About
Clarify the original intent (without over-citing):
The lesson is
not malevolence
It is:
Proxy collapse
Instrumental convergence
Irreversibility once scale is reached
Important reframing:
The paperclip is not a physical object. It is any metric that becomes terminal by accident.
3. From Paperclips to Ledgers
Define your core analogy precisely.
3.1 What Counts as a "Ledger"
Examples:
Followers
Likes
Subscriptions
Watch time
Search dominance
Bookmarks / saved links
Identity graphs
Crucial sentence you'll want to reuse later:
A ledger is a memory structure that converts human action into a countable artifact that can be optimized independently of its original meaning.
3.2 Why Ledgers Are Perfect Paperclips
Properties:
Scalar
Comparable
Accumulative
Legible to machines
Illegible to ethics
This is where your argument is strongest.
4. Facebook as a Follower-Maximizing System
You can be surgical here:
Identity = follower graph position
Content = means of ledger expansion
Users = both producers
and
raw material
Important distinction:
Facebook does not optimize for connection; it optimizes for
connection tokens
.
This lets you explain:
Sexualized clickbait
Rage content
Scam amplification
Identity collapse
All as
instrumentally rational
.
5. Google as a Bookmark and Attention Maximizer
Shift from social to epistemic harm:
Search ranking as ledger ordering
SEO as adversarial pressure
Ads as ledger monetization
Knowledge replaced by retrievability
Strong line to include:
When retrieval probability becomes the objective, truth becomes noise.
6. Instrumental Convergence Without Superintelligence
This is the conceptual core.
Show that Facebook and Google independently converged on:
Surveillance
Manipulation
Addiction
Expansion
Regulatory capture
Not because they are evil, but because:
Any system maximizing a scalar proxy under competition will converge on control.
7. Why This Is Worse Than the Thought Experiment
Three reasons:
Irreversibility
- these systems shape culture itself
Opacity
- objectives are hidden behind UX
Legitimacy
- users consent without understanding the optimization target
This is where your broader RSVP / semantic-entropy work slots in cleanly.
8. Alignment Is Not a Future Problem
Explicit thesis statement:
We are not failing to align future AI. We have failed to align existing optimization infrastructure.
Make clear:
This is not about LLMs
This is not about AGI timelines
This is about
metric governance
9. What a Non-Paperclip System Would Require
Without designing the full solution yet, list constraints:
Multiple incommensurable objectives
Hard stopping conditions
Non-scalar success criteria
User-legible optimization goals
Entropy bounds on identity and meaning
This connects cleanly to your coherence-first architecture work.
10. Conclusion: Turning Off the Ledger
End with a sentence like:
The danger is not that machines will someday decide to maximize paperclips. The danger is that we already built systems that cannot decide to stop.
If you want next steps
I can:
Write
Section 1-3 fully in prose
Adapt this to your
existing LuaLaTeX template verbatim
Add a
formal definition section
(ledger, proxy, convergence)
Rewrite it in a
more academic / less polemical register
Tie it explicitly to
AI alignment literature
without losing bite
Just tell me how hard you want to push it.
ChatGPT can make mistakes. Check important info. See
Cookie Preferences
.

