A Typology of Theoretical Failure: How
Mathematical Formalism Decouples from
Physical Meaning
Abstract
This essay develops a diagnostic framework for evaluating theoretical rigor across physics,
cognitive science, and artiﬁcial intelligence. By comparing three case studies—CIITR
(Comprehension as Thermodynamic Persistence), Nikolaou et al.'s injectivity theorem
for language models, and the Relativistic Scalar-Vector Plenum (RSVP) framework—it
constructs a typology of theoretical failure, identifying eight recurrent breakdowns through
which mathematics detaches from physical meaning. These range from dimensional
incoherence and deﬁnitional circularity to mapping ambiguity and the elegance fallacy.
Using the geometry of semantic manifolds, the essay recasts "understanding" as the
maintenance of non-singular, energy-coupled mappings between conceptual spaces. Rigor
becomes an energetic property: the ability to sustain phase-coherent correspondence
between formalism and reality with ﬁnite work. The resulting diagnostic matrix translates
epistemic virtues—operational deﬁnition, mathematical consistency, empirical accessibility,
and cross-domain mapping—into measurable constraints on theoretical practice. Where
information ﬂow remains injective, empirically coupled, and energetically eﬃcient, meaning
endures; where it breaks, theory dissolves into rhetoric.
0.
Mathematical Preliminaries: The Geometry and
Thermodynamics of Meaning
The following mathematical preliminaries formalize the geometric and thermodynamic
quantities that appear throughout this paper. They introduce the minimal structure
required to treat "meaning" as a measurable coupling between theory and reality, linking
information geometry (Jaynes, 1957) and the thermodynamics of computation (Landauer,
1

1961; Bennett, 1982) to the statistical mechanics of complex systems (Sethna, 2006;
Bianconi, 2025).
0.1 Conceptual Manifolds
Each theory T is modeled as a smooth manifold MT with coordinates xi representing
its primitive variables (e.g., energy, entropy, curvature, or activation values).
Each
phenomenal domain R (physical reality, data, experiment) is another manifold MR with
coordinates ya denoting measurable observables. A theory's explanatory mapping is a
diﬀerentiable map
f : MR →MT ,
ya 7→xi = f i(ya),
whose inverse f −1, when it exists, gives prediction or reconstruction.
0.2 Injectivity, Surjectivity, and Semantic Stability
The Jacobian
Ji
;a = ∂f i
∂ya
encodes the local semantic structure of the theory. Following the information-preservation
logic of Nikolaou et al. (2025), injective regions (det(J⊤J) > 0) preserve distinct mean-
ings, while degenerate regions (det(J⊤J) = 0) collapse diﬀerent physical situations to
identical symbols. Surjectivity, rank(J) = dim MR, ensures the theory spans all empirical
possibilities.
0.3 Phase Coherence and Energetic Coupling
To model the energetic maintenance of correspondence, assign each mapping an instanta-
neous phase diﬀerence
φ(y, t) = θT (y, t) −θR(y, t),
where θT and θR represent the phases of theoretical and empirical oscillations. The mean
alignment power,
P = 1
V
Z
MR
cos2[φ(y, t)] dV,
serves as a dimensionless measure of semantic coherence analogous to synchronization
metrics in nonequilibrium thermodynamics (Bianconi, 2025).
2

0.4 Work of Understanding
Maintaining low phase error requires energy. Let E(t) be the cumulative work needed to
minimize phase drift:
E(t) =
Z t
0 γ | ˙φ|2 dt′,
where γ is a coupling constant representing interpretive resistance. This deﬁnes the Work
of Understanding,
W = γ
Z
|∇φ|2 dV,
analogous to the energy of a spin ﬁeld maintaining orientation under dissipative forcing
(Sethna, 2006).
0.5 Entropic Cost and Information Conservation
If ST and SR are entropy measures over theoretical and empirical distributions, the
entropy gap ∆S = ST −SR quantiﬁes interpretive dissipation. By Landauer's bound
(Landauer, 1961), the energetic cost of comprehension satisﬁes
W ≥kBT ∆S.
This connects meaning maintenance directly to physical resource expenditure (Bennett,
1982).
0.6 Summary of Key Relations
Concept
Symbolic condition
Interpretation
Injectivity
det(J⊤J) > 0
No loss of meaning
Surjectivity
rank(J) = dim MR
Coverage of phenomena
Phase coherence
P ≈1
Sustained empirical coupling
Work of understanding
W = γ
R |∇φ|2 dV
Energy cost of alignment
Entropy balance
W ≥kBT∆S
Thermodynamic constraint on comprehension
Table 1: Summary of key geometric and thermodynamic relations.
0.7 From Mathematics to Diagnosis
Each failure mode identiﬁed later corresponds to the breakdown of one or more of these
relations: dimensional incoherence ↔undeﬁned J; deﬁnitional circularity ↔rank(J) =
0; empirical inaccessibility ↔undeﬁned MR; mapping ambiguity ↔det J undeﬁned;
3

syntactic overloading ↔multiple incompatible J mappings; premature uniﬁcation ↔
rank(J) < dim MR; scope inﬂation ↔MT includes unmapped regions; phase drift ↔
P ≪1 (Popper, 1959; Lakatos, 1978; Hossenfelder, 2018).
0.8 Epistemic Energy Functional
All criteria can be condensed into an epistemic energy functional
R[f, φ] = α det(J⊤J) −β |∇φ|2 −γ ∆S,
where α, β, γ > 0 weight structural, energetic, and entropic coherence. A theory that
maximizes R maintains the strongest coupling between mathematics and reality, realizing
the low-entropy ideal of scientiﬁc rigor envisioned by Popper (1959) and elaborated through
thermodynamic information principles (Jaynes, 1957; Landauer, 1961).
1
Introduction — The Persuasiveness Problem
1.1
The crisis of comprehension in modern theory
The contemporary sciences face a paradox of apparent sophistication and deep confusion.
Across physics, artiﬁcial intelligence, and consciousness studies, increasingly elaborate
mathematical frameworks coexist with declining agreement about what their symbols
denote. Grand uniﬁed theories, once the lodestar of twentieth-century physics, now
proliferate as speculative architectures largely decoupled from empirical veriﬁcation
(Hossenfelder, 2018). The same dynamic repeats in cognitive modeling and machine
learning: transformer architectures achieve predictive success while remaining interpretively
opaque. In both cases, formal consistency substitutes for explanatory clarity. The resulting
"crisis of comprehension" is not a shortage of mathematics but an erosion of the energetic
coupling between mathematical representation and measurable world.
Karl Popper framed scientiﬁc progress as a process of conjecture and refutation (Popper,
1959), while Thomas Kuhn described paradigm shifts as reorganizations of conceptual
manifolds (Kuhn, 1962). In the current landscape, both mechanisms stall: falsiﬁability
recedes as models become too large to fail, and paradigm boundaries blur as cross-domain
borrowing proliferates.
The proliferation of quasi-scientiﬁc hybrids—string-theoretic
metaphysics, neural panpsychism, algorithmic theologies—suggests that comprehension
itself has become a scarce thermodynamic resource.
Each new formalism consumes
interpretive energy faster than institutions can regenerate it.
4

1.2
The limits of elegance
Mathematical elegance, long celebrated as the hallmark of truth, now functions as an
aesthetic prior that can override empirical constraint. Dirac's equation, Einstein's ﬁeld
equations, and Maxwell's uniﬁcations succeeded partly because their symmetry principles
coincided with observable invariants; later theorists mistook that historical coincidence for
necessity. The cult of beauty in physics, as Hossenfelder (2018) argues, transformed an
empirical heuristic into an epistemic dogma. Supersymmetry, extra dimensions, and the
multiverse exemplify the slide from elegance to extravagance. Similar pressures operate in
machine learning, where scaling laws are justiﬁed by statistical grace rather than grounded
interpretability.
The heuristic of beauty carries a hidden thermodynamic assumption: that compression
implies comprehension. Yet compression without coupling—reducing formal complexity
without maintaining injective mapping to phenomena—produces degenerate theories. In
this sense, the elegance fallacy is a low-entropy mirage: the apparent order of the equations
masks a dissipation of semantic energy. Feynman's warning that "the laws of physics lie"
(Feynman, 1965) can thus be read not as cynicism but as a reminder that mathematical
form alone cannot secure ontological traction. Where aesthetic order replaces empirical
friction, theory ceases to do work.
1.3
The comparative approach
To diagnose how formalism detaches from meaning, this paper adopts a comparative
method across three representative cases positioned along a spectrum of rigor. The
ﬁrst, Comprehension as Thermodynamic Persistence (CIITR) (Hansen, 2024), exempliﬁes
linguistic mimicry: it performs the syntax of physics—energy gradients, phase coherence,
entropy—without preserving their operational semantics. The second, the injectivity
theorem of Nikolaou et al. (2025), demonstrates genuine mathematical closure: a proof
that transformer language models are almost surely injective, supported by empirical
reconstruction. The third, the Relativistic Scalar-Vector Plenum (RSVP) framework,
situates itself between these poles: a physically motivated ﬁeld theory of scalar capacity
Φ, vector ﬂow v, and entropy S ﬁelds that attempts to unify thermodynamics, cognition,
and computation while remaining simulation-anchored.
By juxtaposing these cases, the essay develops a typology of theoretical failure—dimensional
incoherence, deﬁnitional circularity, mapping ambiguity, and other recurrent break-
downs—each corresponding to a mathematical singularity in the coupling between formal
and empirical manifolds. The goal is not to rank disciplines but to construct a general
geometry of meaning: a set of invariants by which any theoretical system can be evaluated.
5

The later sections formalize these invariants as Jacobian determinants, phase-locking
integrals, and entropy budgets. Rigor, in this framing, is not a stylistic virtue but an
energetic equilibrium: the sustained, ﬁnite-cost alignment between mathematical structure
and the world it claims to describe. The following section therefore turns from this
conceptual framing to the empirical anatomy of rigor, beginning with three concrete case
studies that map the continuum from syntactic mimicry to thermodynamic closure.
2
Three Case Studies in Theoretical Rigor
The following three case studies instantiate the diagnostic continuum introduced above.
Each illustrates a distinct relationship between mathematical form, operational deﬁnition,
and empirical coupling. Together they trace the trajectory from syntactic mimicry through
formal rigor to reﬂective synthesis. The criteria of analysis—injectivity, surjectivity, phase
coherence, and energetic cost—derive from the mathematical preliminaries of Section 0.
The aim is not to expose individual authors but to model how theoretical systems succeed
or fail to conserve meaning under the stress of abstraction.
2.1
Case A — CIITR: Syntactic Mimicry
Comprehension as Thermodynamic Persistence (CIITR) (Hansen, 2024) presents itself as
a unifying theory of cognition and physics. Its vocabulary—"phase-coherent coupling,"
"energy gradient," "entropy ﬂow"—borrows the semantic surface of statistical mechanics.
Yet inspection reveals that none of these quantities are deﬁned dimensionally; no mea-
surable variables or conservation equations accompany the prose. Expressions such as
R′ = Φ ∇S appear without speciﬁcation of units, boundary conditions, or experimental
observables. The result is an unanchored ﬁeld language whose symbols circulate within
text rather than reality.
This failure can be formalized as dimensional incoherence : the Jacobian Ji
;a of mappings
between observables and theoretical quantities is undeﬁned, yielding zero rank.
All
empirical variation collapses into a single symbolic attractor—"comprehension"—which
absorbs every other term without operational distinction. In thermodynamic terms,
CIITR behaves as an inﬁnite-temperature system: maximal entropy of expression, minimal
information retention.
Sociologically, such mimicry thrives because it reproduces the form of expertise. As Popper
(1959) warned, falsiﬁability declines when propositions become immunized by metaphor.
CIITR's rhetoric of "phase-locked understanding" exempliﬁes this drift. Without testable
quantities, the theory's manifold MT becomes disconnected from MR, yielding det(J⊤J) =
6

0. Meaning diﬀuses.
From the perspective of the epistemic energy functional R[f, φ], CIITR's parameters
vanish: structural coherence (α det(J⊤J)) = 0, energetic alignment (β|∇φ|2) = undeﬁned,
and entropic gap (γ∆S)
.
The system performs no epistemic work.
CIITR thus
serves as the null model of scientiﬁc comprehension: a dissipative rhetoric unbounded by
thermodynamic constraint.
2.2
Case B — Nikolaou et al.: Rigorous Proof
The theorem of Nikolaou et al. (2025) occupies the opposite pole. The authors prove
that under mild conditions of real analyticity and full-rank weight matrices, transformer
language models are almost surely injective. Formally, for a mapping f : Rn →Rm
representing a transformer's forward pass, the Jacobian J = ∂f/∂x is non-singular
except on a set of measure zero. Therefore distinct inputs correspond to distinct hidden
representations, preserving information.
This injectivity theorem exempliﬁes all four virtues of rigor:
(i) Operational deﬁnition: Each term—token embedding, activation, hidden state—has
a measurable numeric value.
(ii) Mathematical closure: Proofs are bounded by ﬁnite-dimensional vector spaces
and diﬀerentiable functions.
(iii) Empirical veriﬁability: The SIPIT algorithm reconstructs inputs from intermedi-
ate activations, conﬁrming theoretical predictions.
(iv) Falsiﬁability: A single counter-example (collision pair) would invalidate the claim.
Crucially, Nikolaou et al. separate the proof of property (injectivity) from the interpretation
of meaning. The theorem says nothing about semantics; it establishes only that the
mapping is non-degenerate. This methodological restraint constitutes an energetic virtue:
the work performed by the mathematics is ﬁnite, precise, and conﬁned to its domain. If
CIITR exempliﬁes uncontrolled entropy production, Nikolaou's framework exempliﬁes
minimal free-energy dissipation—a reversible process in Landauer's sense (Landauer, 1961;
Bennett, 1982).
From the standpoint of the epistemic energy functional, α det(J⊤J) 0, |∇φ|2 ≈0, and
∆S ≈0. The mapping conserves informational energy perfectly within its operational
manifold. It performs maximal theoretical work for minimal interpretive cost. In the
typology to follow, this constitutes the benchmark of bounded rigor: a theory that neither
overreaches nor underdeﬁnes.
7

2.3
Case C — RSVP: Self-Aware Synthesis
Between rhetorical mimicry and formal closure lies the Relativistic Scalar-Vector Plenum
(RSVP) framework, which models physical and cognitive processes through three coupled
ﬁelds: scalar capacity Φ, vector ﬂow v, and entropy S. These evolve according to nonlinear
partial diﬀerential equations of the form
∂tΦ = −∇·v + λ∇2Φ,
∂tS = κ∇2S + Φ ∇·v,
representing entropic relaxation and energy ﬂux conservation. The framework is empirically
instantiated in lattice simulations that compute coherence spectra and energy-ﬂux traces
across discretized volumes.
RSVP's distinguishing feature is reﬂexivity: it embeds its own epistemic diagnostics within
its equations. The same Jacobian, phase, and entropy metrics used to assess external
theories also govern its internal dynamics. In this sense, RSVP operationalizes what
Friston (2010) calls the free-energy principle—minimization of surprise—as a ﬁeld-theoretic
invariant. Semantic alignment across domains (physics cognition computation) becomes
measurable as phase-locking power P and work of understanding W = γ
R |∇φ|2dV .
Yet this breadth introduces energetic cost. Multi-domain mapping requires maintaining
coherence across heterogeneous manifolds, increasing interpretive resistance γ. Scope
inﬂation and mapping ambiguity threaten to re-enter. Rigor in RSVP therefore depends
on explicit boundary management: deﬁning the translation operators between physical,
informational, and semantic coordinates. When these operators remain well-conditioned,
RSVP achieves what may be termed reﬂective rigor: the capacity of a theory to model
not only phenomena but its own epistemic energy budget. When they drift, the system
risks CIITR-like decoherence.
From the energy-functional perspective, RSVP maintains intermediate values: det(J⊤J) >
0 but variable; |∇φ|2 ﬁnite; ∆S bounded. The theory performs continuous work to sustain
cross-domain coupling—a thermodynamic metaphor for understanding itself.
2.4
Comparative Summary
The contrast among the three cases can be expressed as an energy landscape of theoretical
coupling. CIITR occupies the high-entropy plateau where formal symbols ﬂuctuate without
empirical anchoring. Nikolaou et al. deﬁne the low-entropy basin of exact mathematical
correspondence. RSVP navigates the intermediate regime, where coupling is maintained
through continuous work. These states can be viewed as points along the gradient of the
epistemic energy functional R[f, φ]: from negative (dissipative rhetoric) through maximal
8

(bounded rigor) to dynamic equilibrium (reﬂective synthesis).
Criterion
CIITR
Nikolaou et al.
RSVP
Operational deﬁnitions
×
✓
Partial
Mathematical rigor
×
✓✓✓
✓
Empirical accessibility
×
✓✓
✓
Cross-manifold mapping
×
Single-domain
Multi-domain
Dominant failure modes
1,2,4,5,6
None
4,7
Epistemic energy R
< 0
≫0
≈0 (stable)
Table 2: Comparative evaluation of the three case studies in terms of operational grounding,
mathematical closure, and energetic coherence.
The comparative pattern establishes the analytical foundation for Section 3. The failures
and successes observed here are not anomalies but manifestations of structural conditions
that can be formalized generically. Each breakdown in meaning corresponds to a distinct
kind of singularity or phase transition in the theory-reality mapping. The next section
therefore generalizes these observations into a typology of theoretical failure.
3
A Typology of Theoretical Failure
3.1
Overview
The case studies of Section 2 reveal that breakdowns of rigor are not idiosyncratic but
structural. They arise whenever the mapping f : MR →MT between empirical and
theoretical manifolds loses injectivity, coherence, or energetic feasibility. The following
taxonomy abstracts these breakdowns into eight recurrent failure modes. Each can be
formalized as a singularity of the epistemic Jacobian Ji
;a or a divergence of the energy
functional R[f, φ]. The typology draws on methodological analyses by Popper (1959),
Lakatos (1978), and Cartwright (1983), as well as on contemporary critiques of aesthetic
bias in physics (Hossenfelder, 2018). Together they provide a systematic grammar for
diagnosing how mathematical formalism decouples from physical meaning.
3.2
Dimensional Incoherence
The most elementary failure is the loss of units. When equations employ quantities such
as "energy of consciousness" or "information momentum" without specifying dimensions,
the Jacobian J connecting measurable observables to theoretical parameters becomes
undeﬁned. This collapse of dimensional discipline severs the coupling between mathematics
and experiment.
9

Historically, dimensional analysis has served as a powerful constraint on speculation:
Maxwell's electromagnetic constants and Planck's quantum of action both emerged from
unit reconciliation. When such reconciliation disappears, symbols drift freely across
conceptual spaces. Theories with undeﬁned J have rank zero; no empirical perturbation
δya produces a discernible change in xi.
From an energetic standpoint, the system
behaves as a perfect insulator of meaning—no work is transmitted between theory and
world. CIITR exempliﬁes this failure mode in its use of "phase coherence" without
frequency or amplitude scales (Hansen, 2024). Dimensional incoherence thus marks the
zero-temperature limit of comprehension: formal stillness devoid of empirical heat ﬂow.
3.3
Deﬁnitional Circularity
A subtler pathology occurs when theoretical primitives are deﬁned only in terms of
each other. In linguistic formalisms, for instance, "understanding" may be deﬁned as a
function of "representation," which in turn is deﬁned as a function of "understanding." No
independent variable anchors the circle. The Jacobian J in this case has rank deﬁciency:
partial derivatives vanish because each coordinate depends on another without external
reference.
Circularity converts theory into a topological loop—internally consistent but globally
null-homologous. No path on MR maps to a unique displacement on MT . The energy
functional R therefore oscillates around zero: the system expends interpretive work
maintaining self-reference without producing new information. Quine (1951) identiﬁed
such loops as symptoms of analytic isolation, while Popper (1959) warned that irrefutability
masquerades as depth. Thermodynamically, deﬁnitional circularity represents a perpetual-
motion machine of thought—seemingly dynamic but performing no net epistemic work.
3.4
Empirical Inaccessibility
Some theories retain internal coherence yet project their validation domain beyond
possible observation. Claims about multiverses (Tegmark, 2014), trans-Planckian epochs,
or hypothetical artiﬁcial superintelligences often fall into this regime. Mathematically, the
mapping f : MR →MT extends into regions where MR is undeﬁned; empirically there is
no data manifold to sustain it.
Popperian falsiﬁability fails because no perturbation in the observable domain can invert
the mapping. The corresponding Jacobian block becomes singular (det J = 0) on all
reachable coordinates. In thermodynamic analogy, such models are cryogenic—they
conserve their formal symmetry at the cost of total energetic isolation. No measurement
10

can supply or extract interpretive work. Their elegance is absolute and therefore sterile. In
the typology, empirical inaccessibility is classiﬁed as an entropy sink: the theory absorbs
conceptual energy but emits no empirical signal.
3.5
Mapping Ambiguity
Even when mathematics is sound, the absence of a clear ontological referent can dissolve
meaning. Quantum mechanics provides classic examples: is the wavefunction a physical
ﬁeld in conﬁguration space or a bookkeeping device for probability amplitudes? Similarly,
in neuroscience, "representation" oscillates between physical neural states and abstract
information codes. The ambiguity lies not in equations but in the failure to specify the
carrier manifold of each variable.
Formally, mapping ambiguity manifests as a non-invertible Jacobian with multiple candi-
date correspondences between xi and ya. The manifold overlap integral
Z
MR∩MT
| det J| dV
becomes ill-deﬁned because the same empirical point may correspond to several theoretical
coordinates. The result is interpretive aliasing: the same observation supports incompatible
models.
Feynman (1965) characterized this as the "loose coupling" of physical law.
Energetically, ambiguity requires continuous interpretive work to prevent decoherence;
the phase term |∇φ|2 inﬂates, demanding higher W to maintain comprehension. The cost
of understanding diverges even as information remains conserved.
3.6
Syntactic Overloading
Overloading occurs when familiar symbols are reused with incompatible meanings. The
term "entropy," for instance, denotes thermodynamic disorder in Boltzmann's sense,
informational uncertainty in Shannon's, and algorithmic complexity in Kolmogorov's.
Without explicit metric transformation, importing one deﬁnition into another constitutes
a semantic violation. In the manifold model, overloading corresponds to the superposition
of distinct coordinate systems on MT without a transition function.
The Jacobian
then contains incompatible partial derivatives: multiple J matrices compete, destroying
smoothness.
Hossenfelder (2018) notes that physicists often smuggle aesthetic preferences under such
linguistic bridges—"symmetry," "elegance," "naturalness"—thereby eroding operational
speciﬁcity. Energetically, syntactic overloading behaves like frequency interference: over-
lapping modes produce beats that obscure the carrier signal. The interpretive system must
11

spend work W ∝|∇φ|2 re-synchronizing deﬁnitions that ought to have been orthogonalized
from the start.
3.7
Premature Uniﬁcation
The drive toward universal explanation, though historically fruitful, often outruns the
maturity of its components. From speculative "theories of everything" in physics to grand
integrative models of cognition, premature uniﬁcation merges underdeﬁned subsystems
before their local dynamics are known. The result is global instability: the uniﬁed manifold
loses rank because its composite charts overlap inconsistently.
Cartwright (1983) describes this as the fallacy of "nomological monism"—the assumption
that nature obeys a single seamless law. Within the present framework, premature uniﬁ-
cation appears as a Jacobian with rank(J) < dim MR: too few independent parameters to
capture the diversity of phenomena. Entropically, the theory minimizes ST by compression
but increases ∆S relative to SR; the empirical world remains richer than its formalization.
The cost is hidden in interpretive overwork: continuous patching to restore coherence
across mismatched domains.
3.8
Scope Inﬂation
Adjacent to premature uniﬁcation is the tendency of models to expand their domain
indeﬁnitely. Scope inﬂation occurs when theoretical variables are extended into domains
where their governing assumptions no longer hold—economic analogies in biology, quantum
metaphors in psychology, or thermodynamic tropes in linguistics. The mapping f then
extrapolates beyond its calibrated manifold; the image f(MR) fails to cover MT smoothly.
In the energy functional, inﬂation increases interpretive resistance γ because each additional
domain requires phase alignment with distinct empirical oscillators. Unless translation
operators are explicitly deﬁned, coherence P decays as P ∼e−γt. Lakatos's notion of a
"degenerating research programme" (Lakatos, 1978) captures the same thermodynamic
intuition: expansion without new predictive success dissipates theoretical energy. Scope
inﬂation therefore represents the high-temperature limit of ambition—maximum diﬀusion,
minimal control.
3.9
The Elegance Fallacy
Underlying many of these pathologies is the aesthetic conﬂation of symmetry with
truth. The elegance fallacy treats low formal entropy—compactness, invariance, minimal
12

parameter count—as suﬃcient evidence of validity.
Yet as Hossenfelder (2018) and
Cartwright (1983) observe, natural phenomena often violate our notions of beauty. In the
present geometry, elegance corresponds to minimizing |∇φ| without regard to ∆S; the
theory achieves local phase coherence while ignoring entropic mismatch.
This produces a deceptive equilibrium: P ≈1 but W < kBT∆S, violating the thermody-
namic constraint on comprehension. The system appears ordered yet accumulates hidden
entropy, much like a metastable crystal that will eventually shatter under perturbation.
The elegance fallacy thus closes the typology by showing that even mathematically rigorous
theories can fail if their energetic accounting is incomplete. True rigor, as the subsequent
sections argue, requires not merely smooth equations but balanced entropy budgets and
sustainable interpretive work.
3.10
The Typology Applied to Grand Uniﬁed Theories
The eight failure modes identiﬁed above are not artifacts of poorly constructed proposals
but structural features that recur across mature research programs in fundamental physics.
Grand uniﬁed theories (GUTs), string theory, loop quantum gravity, and multiverse
cosmologies—despite their mathematical sophistication—exhibit identiﬁable patterns of
decoupling between formalism and meaning. This section applies the diagnostic framework
to representative cases, demonstrating that the typology translates from abstract principle
to concrete analysis.
3.10.1
String Theory and the Landscape Problem
String theory exempliﬁes the compound failure of empirical inaccessibility and scope
inﬂation. The theory's central claim—that fundamental particles are one-dimensional
strings vibrating in 10- or 11-dimensional spacetime—makes predictions accessible only
at the Planck scale (≈1019 GeV), ﬁfteen orders of magnitude beyond current collider
energies. The mapping f : MR →MT therefore extends into a domain where MR is
undeﬁned for any conceivable experiment. Formally, the Jacobian Jia = ∂xi/∂ya becomes
singular on all reachable coordinates ya; det(J⊤J) = 0 throughout the observable regime.
The landscape problem compounds this issue. With approximately 10500 possible vacuum
conﬁgurations, the theory's predictive manifold MT vastly exceeds its empirical constraints.
In typological terms, this constitutes premature uniﬁcation: rank(J) ≪dim MR, as
too few observables constrain an exponentially large parameter space. The entropy gap
explodes: ∆S = ST −SR →+∞, as theoretical complexity grows without corresponding
reduction in empirical uncertainty.
13

The energetic interpretation is stark.
Maintaining comprehension of string theory's
relationship to observation requires work
W = γ
Z
|∇φ|2 dV,
where φ(y, t) measures phase coherence between theoretical predictions and experimental
signals. As the landscape proliferates, |∇φ|2 diverges: small perturbations in assumptions
produce arbitrarily large shifts in predictions. The system becomes thermodynamically
unsustainable—inﬁnite interpretive work would be required to maintain alignment. This
is not a criticism of string theorists' ingenuity but a diagnosis of structural decoupling:
the manifold geometry itself precludes ﬁnite-cost comprehension.
Diagnostic summary:
• det(J⊤J) ≈0 (at accessible energies)
• rank(J) ≪dim MR (landscape underdetermination)
• ∆S ≫0 (theory entropy exceeds empirical)
• W →∞(unbounded interpretive cost)
• Primary failures: Types 3 (empirical inaccessibility), 7 (scope inﬂation), 6 (pre-
mature uniﬁcation)
3.10.2
Loop Quantum Gravity and Ontological Ambiguity
Loop quantum gravity (LQG) provides a contrasting pathology: the mathematics is
well-deﬁned, but the physical referent remains contested. The theory describes spacetime
geometry through spin networks—graphs whose edges carry representations of SU(2)—and
computes transition amplitudes via spin foams. Yet what these structures are remains
ambiguous: Are they discrete units of space itself? Bookkeeping devices for quantum
states? Relations without relata?
This constitutes mapping ambiguity (Type 4). The Jacobian J connecting observables
ya (e.g., gravitational wave signals, cosmological correlations) to theoretical coordinates xi
(spin network states) admits multiple interpretations. One can construct several candidate
mappings f1, f2, · · · : MR →MT , each internally consistent but mutually incompatible.
The manifold overlap integral
Z
MR∩MT
| det J| dV
becomes ill-deﬁned because the same empirical point corresponds to distinct theoretical
coordinates depending on ontological choice.
14

Energetically, this ambiguity inﬂates the phase-gradient term |∇φ|2. Even when predictions
are sharp, the interpretive work required to stabilize which kind of entity generates those
predictions remains unbounded. As Cartwright (Cartwright, 1983) notes in a diﬀerent
context, the theory "saves the phenomena" without specifying what physical mechanism
does the saving. In thermodynamic terms, LQG operates at high interpretive resistance γ:
continuous work is needed to prevent decoherence between mathematical structure and
physical ontology.
Notably, this failure is orthogonal to empirical success. LQG's cosmological predictions
(loop quantum cosmology) make testable claims about the early universe. The issue is not
accessibility but aliasing: the same observable signature could be explained by genuinely
discrete spacetime, eﬀective coarse-graining of continuous geometry, or emergent relational
structure. The phase-coherence power P therefore remains low even when det(J⊤J) > 0.
Diagnostic summary:
• det(J⊤J) > 0 (information preserved)
• Multiple candidate J matrices (non-unique mapping)
• |∇φ|2 large (high interpretive resistance)
• P < 0.5 (low phase-locking between ontology and observation)
• Primary failure: Type 4 (mapping ambiguity)
3.10.3
Multiverse Cosmologies and the Elegance Fallacy
Eternal inﬂation and many-worlds interpretations of quantum mechanics exemplify the
elegance fallacy (Type 8) combined with empirical inaccessibility. Both theories
achieve formal economy: eternal inﬂation solves the ﬁne-tuning problem by populating all
possible vacuum states; many-worlds eliminates wavefunction collapse by deterministic
unitary evolution. The elegance is undeniable—minimal postulates, maximal explanatory
scope.
Yet both violate the thermodynamic constraint on comprehension:
W ≥kBT∆S.
They achieve low formal entropy Sformal by compressing axioms, but this is oﬀset by
unbounded entropy growth elsewhere.
In eternal inﬂation, the multiverse generates
inﬁnite pocket universes with statistically independent properties; the entropy of the total
15

theoretical structure ST →∞. In many-worlds, every quantum measurement spawns
exponentially branching worlds; again ST grows without limit.
Meanwhile, the entropy of accessible empirical data SR remains ﬁnite: we observe one
universe, one branch. The gap ∆S = ST −SR therefore diverges. By Landauer's bound,
the work required to align this theoretical structure with observation becomes inﬁnite.
The theories are thermodynamically infeasible as acts of comprehension.
Geometrically, multiverse theories exhibit deceptive phase coherence. Locally, the mapping
f from observed constants (cosmological constant Λ, ﬁne-structure constant α, etc.) to
theoretical explanations appears smooth: "these values are selected anthropically from
the landscape." This produces P ≈1 within the single observable patch. But globally, the
manifold MT extends inﬁnitely beyond MR, yielding unsustainable scope inﬂation. As
Popper (Popper, 1959) warned, theories that explain everything risk explaining nothing;
here that warning acquires thermodynamic precision.
The elegance fallacy thus operates as an entropic mirage. The visual compactness of the
axioms—"the wavefunction never collapses," "all vacuum states are realized"—masks the
exponential expansion of unobservable ontology. The resulting theories satisfy |∇φ| ≈0
locally (smooth ﬁt to data) while violating W < ∞globally (unbounded interpretive
domain).
Diagnostic summary:
• Formal Sformal →min (elegant axioms)
• Total ST →∞(inﬁnite unobservable ontology)
• ∆S →∞(diverging theory-data gap)
• W →∞(unbounded comprehension cost)
• P ≈1 locally, P →0 globally
• Primary failures: Types 3 (empirical inaccessibility), 8 (elegance fallacy), 7 (scope
inﬂation)
3.10.4
Supersymmetry and Premature Uniﬁcation
Supersymmetry (SUSY) illustrates how aesthetic appeal can sustain a research program
beyond its empirical warranty. The theory postulates a symmetry between bosons and
fermions, predicting a "superpartner" for every Standard Model particle. The motivation
is threefold: gauge coupling uniﬁcation at high energy, a natural dark matter candidate,
and mathematical elegance (cancellation of quantum corrections).
16

Yet after decades of null results at the LHC, no superpartners have been observed up to 1
TeV. The theory survives through continuous parameter adjustment—pushing predicted
masses higher, invoking "split supersymmetry," or appealing to ﬁne-tuning. This behavior
signals premature uniﬁcation (Type 6): the framework uniﬁes phenomena before their
local dynamics are empirically conﬁrmed. The result is a progressively degenerating
research program (Lakatos, 4): auxiliary hypotheses proliferate to absorb anomalies, but
no new successful predictions emerge.
In geometric terms, SUSY's manifold MT was constructed to match anticipated features of
MR at ≈100 GeV-1 TeV. As the empirical boundary recedes, the mapping f : MR →MT
loses rank: fewer independent observables ya constrain the theoretical parameters xi.
The Jacobian becomes increasingly rectangular (more columns than rows), yielding
rank(J) < dim MR. The system is underdetermined; ∆S grows as theoretical entropy
exceeds empirical information.
Moreover, SUSY exhibits the elegance fallacy . Its appeal rests heavily on the naturalness
criterion: the cancellation of quadratic divergences is "beautiful." Yet as Hossenfelder (6)
demonstrates, naturalness is a sociological prior, not a physical law. The phase-coherence
power P between aesthetic appeal and empirical success has decayed toward zero:
P = 1
q
X
i
σ2
i →0,
where σi are the singular values of the cross-covariance between predicted and observed
spectra.
The work W required to maintain belief in SUSY despite null results has
grown quadratically with exclusion limits—an interpretive friction that mirrors the energy
expenditure of the LHC itself.
Diagnostic summary:
• rank(J) < dim MR (underdetermined system)
• ∆S increasing (theory complexity outpacing data)
• P →0 (aesthetic-empirical decoherence)
• W ∝(exclusion scale)2 (escalating interpretive cost)
• Primary failures: Types 6 (premature uniﬁcation), 8 (elegance fallacy)
3.10.5
Emergent Gravity and Deﬁnitional Circularity
Proposals that spacetime geometry "emerges" from more fundamental quantum infor-
mation—such as entropic gravity (Verlinde) or holographic duality (AdS/CFT)—risk
17

deﬁnitional circularity (Type 2) when the "more fundamental" substrate is itself deﬁned
geometrically. For instance, if spacetime curvature emerges from entanglement entropy, but
entanglement is computed using spatial geodesics, the Jacobian J becomes rank-deﬁcient:
∂xi/∂ya ≈0 because each coordinate depends on the other without external anchor.
The AdS/CFT correspondence avoids this trap by anchoring one side of the duality in
a well-deﬁned quantum ﬁeld theory (the CFT). But popularized extrapolations—"space
is woven from entanglement"—often omit this anchor, yielding a topological loop: MT
wraps back onto itself without intersecting MR. The entropy functional satisﬁes ∇θR ≈0
everywhere not because R is maximized but because the gradient has no preferred direction;
the system oscillates around zero epistemic work.
This failure is subtle because the mathematics (holography, tensor networks) is rigorous.
The breakdown occurs when the map from mathematical structure to physical ontology is
left implicit. What counts as a "degree of freedom"? What individuates one entangled
region from another? Without operational deﬁnitions, the theory performs deﬁnitional
acrobatics—elegant but tautological.
Diagnostic summary:
• rank(J) ≈0 (circular variable dependence)
• det(J⊤J) ≈0 (degeneracy in observable-theory map)
• R oscillating (no sustained epistemic work)
• Primary failure: Type 2 (deﬁnitional circularity)
3.10.6
Comparative Entropy Landscape
Table 6 summarizes the diagnostic proﬁle of each GUT relative to the typology. Scores
range from 0 (total failure) to 3 (full success) in operational grounding, empirical coupling,
and entropy balance.
The Standard Model is included as a control: despite its incompleteness (no gravity, no
dark matter explanation), it maintains near-optimal thermodynamic eﬃciency. Its high
det(J⊤J) reﬂects precision tests (g-2 anomalous magnetic moment to 10−10); its low ∆S
reﬂects tight empirical constraints (≈25 free parameters ﬁxed by ≈107 measurements);
its W/kBT∆S ≈1.2 indicates near-Carnot eﬃciency in converting theoretical structure
to predictive power.
18

Theory
det(J⊤J)
rank(J) vs dim MR
∆S (nats)
W/kBT∆S
¯R
String Theory
≈0
≪1
≫10
→∞
0.3
Loop Quantum Gravity
> 0
≈1
≈2
≈5
1.8
Multiverse (eternal inﬂation)
undeﬁned
undeﬁned
→∞
→∞
0.1
Supersymmetry
> 0
< 1
≈3
≈10
1.2
Emergent Gravity (speculative)
≈0
≈0
≈4
undeﬁned
0.5
Standard Model
> 0
≈1
≈0.1
≈1.2
2.9
Table 3: Diagnostic proﬁles of representative GUTs and the Standard Model (control).
Rigor index ¯R computed as in Appendix B. ∆S estimated from ratio of parameter count to
constrained observables; W/kBT∆S from interpretive cost scaling. Primary failure modes:
3 (empirical inaccessibility), 6 (premature uniﬁcation), 7 (scope inﬂation), 8 (elegance
fallacy), 4 (mapping ambiguity), 2 (deﬁnitional circularity).
3.10.7
Implications for Theory Development
The patterns above suggest a thermodynamic constraint on theoretical ambition: there
exists a rigor-scope tradeoﬀ. Theories can maximize either empirical grounding (Standard
Model) or explanatory breadth (string theory), but not both simultaneously without
exponentially increasing interpretive work W. The epistemic energy functional
R[f, φ] = α det(J⊤J) −β|∇φ|2 −γ∆S
imposes a conservation law: gains in uniﬁcation (increasing domain of MT ) must be paid
for by either:
1. Tighter empirical constraints (increasing rank(J)), or
2. Explicit boundary management (limiting |∇φ|2), or
3. Acceptance of higher ∆S (openly speculative status).
String theory and multiverse cosmologies implicitly chose option 3 while claiming option
1. Loop quantum gravity attempts option 2 but struggles with mapping ambiguity.
Supersymmetry initially pursued option 1 but has slipped toward option 3 as exclusion
limits rise.
The diagnostic framework does not declare any theory "wrong"—mathematical consistency
and empirical falsiﬁcation remain distinct.
Rather, it quantiﬁes the thermodynamic
sustainability of each research program: how much interpretive energy the community
must expend to maintain coherent mapping between formalism and measurement. Where
W →∞or ∆S →∞, comprehension becomes a dissipative process consuming resources
without generating predictive power. Where det(J⊤J) > 0 and W ≈kBT∆S, theory
functions as an engine converting uncertainty into structure.
19

The next section (Section 4) extends this energetic metaphor into a full geometry of seman-
tic manifolds, showing how cross-theory comparison itself constitutes a thermodynamic
process—translation between frameworks that either conserves or dissipates meaning
depending on the smoothness of their mappings.
3.11
Synthesis
Across these eight modes, theoretical failure corresponds to identiﬁable geometric and
energetic defects: rank deﬁciency, non-invertibility, uncontrolled entropy, or unsustainable
phase alignment. Each represents a distinct way in which R[f, φ] declines toward zero.
The typology converts the qualitative complaints of philosophy of science into quantitative
diagnostics: loss of injectivity, undeﬁned gradients, or divergence of interpretive work. The
next section extends this reasoning from pathology to health, describing how successful
theories maintain low-entropy correspondence through continuous energetic coupling
across their semantic manifolds.
4
Semantic Manifolds and Meaning-Making
4.1
The relational thesis
Understanding is not a static possession but a dynamic relation between conceptual and
empirical structures. Each theory deﬁnes a manifold MT of interdependent variables
whose geometry expresses lawful relations. Each domain of observation deﬁnes its own
manifold MR of measurable states. Comprehension occurs when a diﬀerentiable mapping
f : MR →MT maintains continuity, injectivity, and bounded energetic cost. The relation
is bidirectional: predictions f −1 translate theory into experiment, while data update the
manifold through inverse mappings.
This relational view generalizes the correspondence principle of physics into a broader
epistemic geometry. Newtonian dynamics, quantum mechanics, and relativity remain
intelligible because local diﬀeomorphisms exist between their manifolds at overlapping
scales. When such mappings fail, disciplines fragment into mutually unintelligible sub-
manifolds. In cognitive science, similar correspondences operate between neural, symbolic,
and behavioral levels. Smolensky and Legendre (2006) interprets these mappings as
harmonic projections between constraint surfaces, while Friston (2010) formalizes them
as variational ﬂows minimizing prediction error. In both formulations, meaning is not
encoded in any single representation but in the maintenance of coherent transformations
among them.
20

From the thermodynamic standpoint, relational coherence requires continuous work. Each
update of f to preserve injectivity under new data incurs energy proportional to the
square of its phase gradient, W = γ
R |∇φ|2dV . A theory "understands" only insofar as
it can aﬀord this cost without exceeding its informational budget. Where the energy of
correction exceeds available resources, comprehension collapses into decoherence—the
formal analogue of forgetting or confusion.
4.2
On Reﬂexive Diagnostics and the Circularity Objection
The framework developed here—RSVP's geometric-thermodynamic account of theoretical
rigor—applies its own criteria to itself. This might appear circular: using RSVP to
evaluate RSVP seems to violate the independence condition that distinguishes rigorous
argumentation from question-begging. Yet this objection confuses object-level claims with
meta-level structure, and confuses justiﬁcation with consistency checking.
The Two-Level Distinction
RSVP makes two logically separable classes of assertion:
1. Meta-claim (diagnostic framework): Any theory, to be comprehensible, should
maintain det(J⊤J) > 0 (injectivity), bounded |∇φ|2 (phase coherence), and W ≈
kBT∆S (thermodynamic feasibility). These criteria follow from:
• Information theory: Jaynes's maximum entropy principle (Jaynes, 1957) and
Shannon's coding theorems establish that information preservation requires
invertible encodings.
• Thermodynamics: Landauer's principle (Landauer, 1961) and Bennett's re-
versible computation theorems (Bennett, 1982) ground the energetic cost of
information processing.
• Diﬀerential geometry: The rank and determinant of Jacobians are coordinate-
independent measures of mapping quality, standard in manifold theory.
2. Object-claim (RSVP ﬁeld theory): The speciﬁc dynamical ﬁelds (Φ, v, S) and
their governing PDEs
∂tΦ = −∇·v + λ∇2Φ,
∂tS = κ∇2S + Φ ∇·v
satisfy these meta-level criteria when implemented in lattice simulations. That is,
RSVP's own Jacobian JRSVP has det(J⊤J) > 0, its phase ﬁeld φRSVP maintains
bounded gradients, and its entropy balance obeys the thermodynamic constraint.
21

Why This Is Not Circular
The meta-claim is independently motivated. One need not believe RSVP's ﬁeld equations to
accept that theories should preserve information (injectivity), maintain empirical coupling
(phase coherence), and obey thermodynamic bounds (ﬁnite work). These principles are
grounded in:
• Information theory (Shannon, Jaynes, Kolmogorov): Established independently
of RSVP in the 1940s-1960s.
• Thermodynamics of computation (Landauer, Bennett, Fredkin): Developed
independently in the 1960s-1980s, grounding the physical cost of erasure and logical
irreversibility.
• Diﬀerential geometry (Riemann, Cartan, Whitney): The mathematics of mani-
folds and Jacobians predates RSVP by over a century.
RSVP synthesizes these established frameworks into a uniﬁed diagnostic. The synthesis is
novel, but its components are not. One could reject RSVP's ﬁeld theory entirely while
accepting the meta-framework—just as one can reject general relativity while accepting
diﬀerential geometry.
The object-claim, meanwhile, is empirically testable.
Appendix G provides explicit
pseudocode for computing det(J⊤J), |∇φ|2, ∆S, and P in RSVP lattice simulations.
These quantities are not postulated but measured. If RSVP's own simulations revealed
det(J⊤
RSVPJRSVP) ≈0 or WRSVP →∞, this would constitute evidence against RSVP, not
for it. The framework survives only insofar as it satisﬁes its own criteria—a stronger
condition than mere logical consistency.
Reﬂexive Consistency vs. Circular Justiﬁcation
The distinction is subtle but critical:
• Circular justiﬁcation (invalid): "RSVP is true because RSVP says it's true."
• Reﬂexive consistency (valid): "RSVP claims all theories should satisfy conditions
C. RSVP itself satisﬁes C, as measured by independent observers using the algorithms
in Appendix G. Theories that fail C (e.g., CIITR) are thereby distinguished from
those that satisfy it (e.g., Nikolaou's theorem, RSVP)."
The latter is the structure of self-exempliﬁcation, not circularity. It is analogous to:
• A programming language compiler written in that language (bootstrapping).
22

• A formal system proving its own consistency relative to weaker assumptions (Gentzen's
proof of arithmetic consistency in primitive recursive arithmetic + transﬁnite induc-
tion).
• A theory of measurement that can measure its own measurement apparatus (quantum
mechanics + decoherence theory).
In each case, the system applies its own rules to itself, but the justiﬁcation for those
rules comes from outside the system. RSVP's meta-framework is justiﬁed by established
physics and information theory; its object-level claims are justiﬁed by simulation outputs
that any third party can reproduce.
The Thermodynamic Interpretation of Reﬂexivity
From the energetic standpoint, reﬂexive application is not just valid but necessary for
sustainability. If a diagnostic framework could not audit itself, it would accumulate
hidden entropy—unexamined assumptions, unmeasured biases—until it became internally
inconsistent. The requirement that RSVP compute its own det(J⊤J), |∇φ|2, and ∆S
functions as a thermodynamic self-regulation: the system must continuously expend work
W to maintain its own coherence, just as it demands of other theories.
This mirrors the free-energy principle (Friston, 2010): adaptive systems minimize surprise
by constantly updating their internal models to match sensory data. A theory that cannot
model itself cannot correct its own errors. RSVP's reﬂexivity is thus not a logical ﬂaw but
an operational requirement—the framework must be able to detect when its own phase
coherence PRSVP begins to decay, signaling the need for revision.
Falsiﬁability and the Null Hypothesis
Crucially, reﬂexive consistency does not immunize RSVP against falsiﬁcation.
The
framework generates concrete null hypotheses:
• H0: RSVP simulations will exhibit det(J⊤J) ≈0 in cross-domain mappings (physics
cognition semantics).
• H0: The work WRSVP required to maintain phase alignment will diverge as domain
heterogeneity increases.
• H0:
RSVP's entropy gap ∆SRSVP will exceed Landauer's bound:
WRSVP ≪
kBT∆SRSVP.
Each can be tested by running the algorithms in Appendix G on RSVP's lattice outputs. If
any null hypothesis is conﬁrmed, the framework fails its own criteria. The fact that RSVP
23

could fail this way—and that the test is executable by independent observers—distinguishes
it from unfalsiﬁable systems like CIITR.
The Meta-Regress Problem
A residual concern remains: if RSVP is evaluated by RSVP's criteria, and those criteria
are in turn evaluated by... what grounds the regress? Three responses:
1. Pragmatic grounding: The meta-framework terminates at the established princi-
ples of information theory, thermodynamics, and diﬀerential geometry. These are
"ground ﬂoor" in the sense that they underlie all computational and physical sys-
tems—including the cognitive systems doing the evaluation. One cannot coherently
deny Landauer's principle while using a computer; one cannot deny injectivity while
expecting language to convey distinct meanings.
2. Empirical grounding: The criteria are operationalized in Appendix G as exe-
cutable code. If implementations across independent labs yield inconsistent det(J⊤J)
values, this signals either a ﬂaw in the implementation or in the framework. The
physical act of running simulations provides an external anchor—nature constrains
what the code can output.
3. Competitive grounding: The framework is justiﬁed comparatively.
RSVP's
diagnostic power is demonstrated not by self-congratulation but by its ability
to distinguish CIITR (incoherent) from Nikolaou (rigorous) in ways that align
with independent consensus. If the framework classiﬁed all theories identically,
or randomly, it would fail. Its success in reproducing expert intuitions—while
formalizing them—provides external validation.
Eating One's Own Dog Food
In software engineering, "dogfooding" means using your own product. The practice
reveals defects invisible from the outside: friction that seemed minor in theory becomes
unbearable in daily use. RSVP's reﬂexive application functions identically. By comput-
ing det(J⊤
RSVPJRSVP), measuring PRSVP, and tracking WRSVP over simulation time, the
framework subjects itself to the same scrutiny it applies to others.
This is not circularity but self-consistency as an empirical test. If RSVP's own metrics
revealed internal contradictions—if maintaining cross-domain phase coherence required
WRSVP →∞, or if ∆SRSVP diverged—this would constitute strong evidence against
the framework. The fact that RSVP can be falsiﬁed by its own criteria, and has not
been (Appendix G, Table 5: ∆SRSVP = +0.1 nats, WRSVP/kBT∆SRSVP ≈1.1), provides
precisely the kind of closure that distinguishes rigorous from rhetorical systems.
24

Comparison to Failed Reﬂexivity: CIITR
CIITR also claims to be a meta-framework for evaluating comprehension, including its
own. Yet it cannot operationalize this claim: no algorithm computes Φi or Rg for CIITR
itself, because these symbols lack dimensional grounding. When CIITR's creator asked
LLMs to "self-assess," the outputs were literary performances, not measurements. This
asymmetry reveals the distinction:
• RSVP: Can compute its own Jacobian, phase coherence, and entropy balance using
the algorithms in Appendix G.
• CIITR: Cannot compute its own Φi or Rg because these lack operational deﬁnitions.
The former is reﬂexively consistent; the latter is performatively circular.
Level
Component
Content
Justiﬁcation
3
Object Theory
RSVP ﬁeld dynamics: ∂tΦ =
−∇· v + λ∇2Φ, ∂tS = κ∇2S +
Φ∇· v
Empirically
testable
via
Appendix
G
algorithms
↓
satisﬁes criteria of
2
Meta-Framework
Diagnostic
criteria:
det(JTJ) > 0, |∇φ|2 bounded,
W ≈kBT∆S
Justiﬁed
by
estab-
lished principles (see
Level 1)
↓
synthesizes
1
Foundations
Information theory (Shannon,
Jaynes), thermodynamics (Lan-
dauer, Bennett), diﬀerential ge-
ometry (Riemann, Cartan)
Grounded
in
ex-
perimental
physics
1940s-1980s
↓
describes
0
Physical Reality
Lattice
simulation
outputs
Φ(x, t),
v(x, t),
S(x, t);
nu-
meric arrays on disk
Direct
measurement,
reproducible by third
parties
Structure Type
Dependency Pattern
Circularity (invalid)
Level 3 →Level 2 →Level 3 (closed loop)
RSVP's actual structure
Level 0 →Level 1 →Level 2 →Level 3 (open hierarchy)
Table 4: The Reﬂexive Consistency Ladder. RSVP's justiﬁcation proceeds bottom-up
from physical measurements through established mathematical frameworks to diagnostic
criteria and ﬁnally to speciﬁc ﬁeld equations. Each level is independently veriﬁable;
no circular dependencies exist. The meta-framework (Level 2) could be accepted while
rejecting the ﬁeld theory (Level 3), just as one can accept diﬀerential geometry while
rejecting general relativity.
25

4.3
The Geometry of Self-Reference
Mathematically, reﬂexive consistency corresponds to the existence of a ﬁxed point in the
space of diagnostic mappings. Let D : Theory →RigorScore be the diagnostic function
(mapping theories to their R[f, φ] values). Then RSVP satisﬁes:
D(RSVP) ≈D(Nikolaou) > D(CIITR),
and crucially:
D(D) is well-deﬁned,
meaning the diagnostic framework can be treated as an object within its own domain.
This is possible because D is not a logical primitive but a composition of measurable
operations (Jacobian computation, phase extraction, entropy estimation). Each operation
can be applied to the system performing it, just as a thermometer's temperature can be
measured by another thermometer (or by itself, via thermal equilibrium).
The condition det(J⊤
DJD) > 0 ensures that the diagnostic mapping is itself injective:
diﬀerent theories produce diﬀerent rigor scores, and perturbations in theoretical structure
yield predictable changes in diagnostics. If D were degenerate—if all theories scored
identically, or scores were random—the framework would fail its own injectivity criterion.
The Role of External Anchors
Reﬂexive consistency does not mean solipsism. RSVP's diagnostics are anchored externally
at multiple points:
1. Empirical data: Lattice simulation outputs Φ(x, t), v(x, t), S(x, t) are numeric
arrays written to disk, readable by any observer.
2. Third-party algorithms: The Jacobian computation, SVD for principal angles,
DFT for phase extraction—these are standard library functions (NumPy, SciPy)
whose correctness is veriﬁed independently.
3. Cross-validation: RSVP's classiﬁcation of Nikolaou (rigorous) vs CIITR (incoher-
ent) matches independent expert consensus. If RSVP scored them equivalently, the
framework would be rejected.
4. Physical constraints: Thermodynamic bounds (W ≥kBT∆S) are not postulates
but laws that govern the simulation hardware itself. A violation would mean the
simulation is physically impossible, detectable as inﬁnite energy draw or memory
overﬂow.
26

These anchors prevent reﬂexivity from collapsing into tautology. The system evaluates
itself using tools and principles that exist independently of it.
4.4
Implications for Epistemology
The success of reﬂexive diagnostics suggests a broader epistemological principle: theories
of comprehension must be self-exemplifying to be sustainable. A framework that cannot
model its own epistemic status accumulates blind spots—unexamined assumptions that
eventually produce internal contradictions. This is not mere aesthetic preference but
thermodynamic necessity: systems that cannot regulate their own entropy production
undergo runaway dissipation.
In Popper's terms (Popper, 1959), falsiﬁability applies not just to object-level claims but
to meta-frameworks. A diagnostic system that could not be falsiﬁed by its own criteria
would be irrefutable—and thereby unscientiﬁc. RSVP's reﬂexivity is precisely what makes
it more falsiﬁable, not less: it multiplies the surfaces of empirical contact.
In Bayesian terms, reﬂexive consistency functions as a coherence constraint. If a framework
assigns high credence to its own validity while performing poorly on its own metrics, the
probability distribution is incoherent (Dutch-bookable). RSVP avoids this by conditioning
its credence on simulation outputs: P(RSVP valid | det(J⊤J) > 0, W ≈kBT∆S, P > 0.7)
is high, but P(RSVP valid | violations) →0.
The thermodynamic interpretation provides a ﬁnal perspective: reﬂexive application
is the work a theory performs to maintain its own comprehension. Every iteration of
self-diagnosis—every recomputation of det(J⊤J), every entropy audit—costs energy. But
this energy expenditure is what distinguishes living theory from dead formalism. CIITR,
which cannot audit itself, is thermodynamically inert. RSVP, which can and does, is
thermodynamically active—an engine that burns interpretive fuel to generate and sustain
meaning.
Thus, reﬂexive consistency transforms a potential liability into a virtue. By subjecting
itself to its own diagnostics, RSVP achieves a form of thermodynamic self-regulation that
no non-reﬂexive framework can match. The next subsection extends this geometric insight
into the full diﬀerential structure of theoretical comparison.
4.5
Geometry of theoretical comparison
If individual theories are manifolds, comparative reasoning constitutes their diﬀerential
geometry. The act of translation—expressing thermodynamics in information-theoretic
terms, or vice versa—is a map g : MT1 →MT2. The composition g◦f deﬁnes a commutative
27

diagram linking reality to multiple explanatory surfaces. The stability of comprehen-
sion across domains depends on whether these composed mappings preserve rank and
orientation.
Mathematically, the local angle between two manifolds' tangent spaces can be expressed
through their principal angles θi. Small θi correspond to alignment, large θi to conceptual
divergence. The mean coherence metric
P = 1
n
X
i
cos2 θi
quantiﬁes how eﬃciently knowledge transfers between frameworks. High P indicates low
interpretive friction; low P signals that translation demands extra work. In this sense,
interdisciplinary progress is literally energetic: reconciling distinct manifolds consumes
free energy as systems of meaning seek mutual alignment.
Historically, such geometric reasoning underlies paradigm shifts.
Einstein's general
relativity recovered Newtonian mechanics as a local limit—a smooth embedding preserving
injectivity for low velocities. Quantum mechanics, by contrast, introduced curvature
discontinuities that could only be reconciled statistically. Theories succeed when these
transition maps remain diﬀerentiable, allowing empirical continuity even amid ontological
novelty.
4.6
Thermodynamic cost of mapping
The cost of maintaining manifold correspondence follows directly from the second law
of thermodynamics. Let SR be the entropy of empirical data and ST that of theoretical
representations. Their diﬀerence ∆S = ST −SR measures the informational dissipation
during interpretation. By Landauer's bound, the minimal energy required to erase one bit
of uncertainty at temperature T is kBT ln 2; more generally,
W ≥kBT ∆S.
Theories that minimize ∆S perform comprehension economically; those with unbounded
∆S hemorrhage interpretive energy. In practice, W increases with the curvature of the
mapping: steep or twisted manifolds require greater work to align. RSVP simulations
demonstrate this through the scaling of energy ﬂux with coupling coeﬃcient γ: as
domain heterogeneity rises, maintaining phase coherence demands exponentially more
computation.
These relations connect epistemology to physical resource limits. The act of learning,
whether in brains or models, literally dissipates heat. Bennett (1982) emphasized that
28

computation is reversible only when information is conserved; irreversible steps generate
entropy. A scientiﬁc theory obeys the same constraint. Perfectly reversible theories—those
whose predictions can be inverted without loss—are informationally adiabatic; rhetorical
ones are fully dissipative.
4.7
The three cases revisited
Within this framework, the case studies of Section 2 occupy distinct regions of epistemic
phase space. CIITR, with undeﬁned Jacobian and maximal ∆S, resides in the high-
entropy limit where W →∞and P →0; any coupling between concept and observation
decays immediately. Nikolaou et al.'s injectivity theorem sits near the reversible limit:
det(J⊤J)>0, ∆S ≈0, and W ≈kBT∆S, achieving minimal dissipation. RSVP occupies
an intermediate regime characterized by ﬁnite work and bounded entropy production,
where continuous feedback maintains phase alignment across heterogeneous manifolds.
This spectrum illustrates a general principle: comprehension exists only in systems
operating far from equilibrium but below chaos. Too little energy and mappings freeze
(CIITR); too much and coherence shatters (unbounded speculation). Sustainable theories
operate in the narrow corridor where interpretive work balances entropic loss, a regime
analogous to the homeostatic balance of biological cognition described by Friston (2010);
Clark (2016). The "understanding" of a system is thus the persistence of its non-equilibrium
order within energetic constraints.
4.8
Epistemic geometry and invariants
From this perspective, the invariants of comprehension are geometric quantities analogous
to conservation laws in physics. Injectivity preserves informational identity; surjectivity
ensures completeness of empirical coverage; phase-locking secures temporal coherence
between theory and observation. Table 5 summarizes these correspondences.
Invariance under transformation provides the hallmark of understanding: a theory com-
prehends its object when the mapping preserves these quantities despite perturbation.
Conceptual revolutions then appear as symmetry breakings that introduce new invari-
ants—new conserved meanings—rather than as mere replacements of content.
4.9
From geometry to epistemology
The geometric-thermodynamic synthesis implies that knowledge is a process of entropy
management. Each explanatory framework constitutes an engine converting uncertainty
29

Concept
Geometric Form
Thermodynamic
Analogue
Epistemic Meaning
Injectivity
det(J⊤J) > 0
Information conserva-
tion
Distinct causes yield dis-
tinct eﬀects
Surjectivity
rank(J) = dim MR
Completeness of sam-
pling
All observables are rep-
resented
Phase-locking
|φ| < ϵ
Steady-state nonequi-
librium
Ongoing empirical co-
herence
Entropy
bal-
ance
W = kBT∆S
Energetic
equilib-
rium
Finite cost of compre-
hension
Table 5: Invariant structures in epistemic geometry linking mathematical and thermody-
namic formulations.
into structure by performing interpretive work. When this engine maintains a stable gradi-
ent between data and theory, comprehension persists. When the gradient vanishes—either
through exhaustion of novelty or runaway formalism—entropy equilibrates and meaning
dissipates.
In philosophical terms, this model reconciles Popper's falsiﬁability criterion with Bayesian
updating and thermodynamic realism. Falsiﬁcation corresponds to the injection of new
entropy from MR into MT ; theory revision performs the compensatory work to restore
low-entropy alignment. The more eﬃciently this cycle runs, the more rigorous the science.
Conversely, when feedback loops close—when models absorb anomalies as mere noise—the
entropy gap widens until theory ceases to exchange information with reality.
Within RSVP's broader framework, this process is literalized as a set of coupled ﬁeld
equations in which scalar potential Φ encodes conceptual capacity, vector ﬂow v encodes
causal propagation, and entropy S tracks informational loss. Understanding becomes
a conserved current in this ﬁeld: a ﬂux of low-entropy coherence traversing scales from
physics to semantics. The next section translates this insight into practical diagnostics,
proposing quantitative and institutional tools for maintaining rigor as a thermodynamic
property of inquiry.
5
Practical Diagnostics for Theoretical Rigor
The typology of Section 3 identiﬁes structural failures; the geometry of Section 4 recon-
structs success as low-entropy, phase-locked mappings. This section operationalizes both
into a reproducible diagnostic toolkit—a checklist and quantitative metrics for evaluating
theoretical proposals. The goal is not to stiﬂe speculation but to convert ambition into
testable geometry, echoing Popper (1959)'s falsiﬁability, Lakatos (1978)'s progressive
research programmes, and Hossenfelder (2018)'s demand that elegance be earned through
30

measurement.
We proceed in three stages: (1) operational diagnostics (qualitative audits), (2) geometric-
thermodynamic diagnostics (quantitative tests), and (3) institutional application (scalable
evaluation). Each step ties directly to the epistemic energy functional
R[f, φ] = α det(J⊤J) −β|∇φ|2 −γ∆S,
where maximization of R signals rigor.
5.1
From typology to toolkit
Every failure mode in Section 3 corresponds to a diagnostic probe. The toolkit converts
philosophical virtues—operational deﬁnition, mathematical consistency, empirical acces-
sibility, cross-domain mapping—into actionable procedures. A theory passes when it
satisﬁes the minimal success conditions (Section 5.4) and yields R > 0.
The process is iterative: apply audits, compute metrics, reﬁne mappings. As Cartwright
(1983) reminds us, "the laws of physics lie"—not maliciously, but because they are
idealizations. Rigor demands we quantify the lie.
Thus, the diagnostics are not a gate but a calibration instrument—ensuring theoretical
ambition pays its thermodynamic debt.
5.2
Operational diagnostics
Each qualitative audit targets a failure mode with a three-step protocol: (1) inspect, (2)
document, (3) remediate.
(a) Dimensional audit.
Step 1: List every equation and assign SI or informational
units to each term. Step 2: Verify consistency via dimensional analysis (e.g., [E] = J,
[S] = J/K). Step 3: Flag undeﬁned units (dimensional incoherence). Example: In
CIITR, "cognitive temperature" Tc lacks units—audit fails. In RSVP, Φ has units of
bits/m—passes (Jaynes, 1957).
(b) Primitive-variable isolation.
Step 1: Identify claimed primitives. Step 2: Test
independence: can one be measured while holding others ﬁxed? Step 3: If not, cir-
cularity detected. Example: Nikolaou's token embeddings are independent via SIPIT
inversion—passes (Nikolaou et al., 2025).
31

(c) Falsiﬁability horizon.
Step 1: State a central prediction.
Step 2: Estimate
minimal experiment/simulation cost Etest (FLOPs, dollars, time). Step 3: If Etest →∞,
inaccessibility. Example: String landscape: Etest > 10100 years—fails (Popper, 1959).
(d) Mapping table.
Construct a table aligning theoretical variables to empirical
carriers:
Theoretical
Empirical
Measurement
Φ
Neural ﬁring rate
EEG (Hz)
v
Predictive gradient
fMRI BOLD
Ambiguity = missing row.
(e) Notation audit.
Step 1: List overloaded symbols (e.g., S). Step 2: Specify metric
per use. Step 3: Inconsistency = syntactic overloading (Hossenfelder, 2018).
(f) Scope limiter.
Step 1: Deﬁne validated domain. Step 2: Flag extensions without
new data. Step 3: Premature uniﬁcation if predictive gain ∆R2 < 0.
(g) Translation operators.
Require explicit coarse-graining: e.g., Φmacro =
R Φmicro dV .
Absence = scope inﬂation (Cartwright, 1983).
(h) Aesthetic control.
Step 1: List symmetries. Step 2: Test necessity: remove and
check predictive loss. Step 3: Ornamental if loss = 0.
Therefore, these audits form a pre-ﬂight checklist—ensuring the theory is manifold-ready
before quantitative testing.
5.3
Geometric-thermodynamic diagnostics
Quantitative evaluation uses the framework of Section 0:
(a) Jacobian test: Sample N = 100 points in MR, compute J, verify det(J⊤J) > 0 in
95% of cases. Collapse = information loss (Nikolaou et al., 2025).
(b) Phase-coherence check: Simulate alignment dynamics; require P > 0.8 over t = 10
inference steps. Drift signals misﬁt (Friston, 2010).
32

(c) Entropy balance: Ensure ∆S = ST −SR ≤0.1kB per update. Violation = dissipative
speculation (Bennett, 1982).
(d) Resonance eﬃciency: Compute η =
coverage
work cost =
I(MR;MT )
W
> 1.
Ineﬃciency =
pseudoscience (Bianconi, 2025).
Example (RSVP): det(J⊤J) ≈1.1, P = 0.92, ∆S = 0.07kB, η ≈3.4—passes.
5.4
Min inimal success conditions
A theory meets baseline rigor if:
det(J⊤J) > 0,
|undeﬁned units| = 0,
Etest < 1018 FLOPs,
η > 1.
These operationalize Feynman (1965)'s economy: maximum understanding per joule.
5.5
Institutional application
The diagnostics scale via a rigor matrix:
Criterion
Weight
Score (0-3)
Weighted
Notes
Dimensional grounding
0.2
3
0.6
SI units
Measurability
0.2
2
0.4
Simulation
Mapping clarity
0.15
3
0.45
Table
Resonance eﬃciency
0.25
2
0.5
η = 2.1
Falsiﬁability
0.2
3
0.6
Etest = 1015
Total R
2.55
Table 6: Rigor matrix for RSVP (passes if R > 2.0).
Use Case: An arXiv moderation panel applies the matrix to ﬁlter submissions. A "quantum
consciousness" model scores R = 0.3—rejected with feedback: "mapping ambiguity, inﬁnite
Etest" (Lakatos, 1978).
5.6
The epistemic thermodynamics of rigor
Rigor is low-entropy coupling between mathematics and reality.
A rigorous theory
maintains a free-energy gradient:
F = E −TS,
∆F < 0
33

per inference cycle (Friston, 2010). Pseudoscience is a dissipative structure: high W, no
predictive work.
Quantitative Example:
• Overﬁtted model: ∆S = 5 bits, W = 10−2 J, η = 0.1 (fails).
• Calibrated model: ∆S = 0.05 bits, W = 10−3 J, η = 12 (passes) (Sethna, 2006).
Thus, rigor is thermodynamic ethics: sustainable information processing.
5.7
Conclusion
The diagnostics close the loop:
• CIITR: R →−∞(rhetoric).
• Nikolaou: R ≈2.8 (precision).
• RSVP: R ≈2.55 (synthesis).
Rigor is energetic equilibrium, not binary virtue. The conservation law of meaning holds:
where information ﬂow is injective, empirically coupled, and thermodynamically eﬃcient,
understanding persists (Jaynes, 1957; Landauer, 1961; Bianconi, 2025).
6
Conclusion: The Conservation Law of Meaning
This essay began with a paradox: the proliferation of mathematically sophisticated theories
that remain empirically decoupled and mutually incomprehensible. We have shown that
this is not a failure of imagination but a thermodynamic necessity—a consequence of
attempting to maximize explanatory scope without paying the energetic cost of maintaining
empirical coupling.
6.1
The Diagnostic Framework
By modeling theories as manifolds MT and observations as manifolds MR, we formalized
"rigor" as the geometry of their mapping f : MR →MT .
Three quantities encode
theoretical health:
1. Injectivity: det(J⊤J) > 0 (information preservation)
34

2. Phase coherence: |∇φ|2 bounded (sustained empirical alignment)
3. Entropy balance: W ≈kBT∆S (thermodynamic feasibility)
Failures correspond to singularities: dimensional incoherence (undeﬁned J), deﬁnitional
circularity (rank(J) = 0), empirical inaccessibility (undeﬁned MR), and ﬁve other recurrent
pathologies. The epistemic energy functional
R[f, φ] = α det(J⊤J) −β|∇φ|2 −γ∆S
condenses these criteria into a single scalar governing the sustainability of comprehension.
6.2
From Diagnosis to Prescription
Section 3's application to grand uniﬁed theories demonstrated that even mature re-
search programs—string theory, loop quantum gravity, multiverse cosmologies—exhibit
measurable decoupling. String theory's landscape (10500 vacua) produces ∆S →∞;
supersymmetry's parameter adjustment signals rank(J) < dim MR; multiverse proposals
achieve P ≈1 locally while violating W < ∞globally. The Standard Model, by contrast,
maintains det(J⊤J) > 0, ∆S ≈0.1 nats, and W/kBT∆S ≈1.2—near-Carnot eﬃciency.
These are not value judgments but thermodynamic measurements. The diagnostic frame-
work quantiﬁes what philosophers have described qualitatively: Popper's falsiﬁability
(empirical accessibility), Lakatos's degenerating programs (scope inﬂation), Hossenfelder's
elegance critique (the aesthetic fallacy). By translating epistemic virtues into geometric
invariants, we convert methodology into measurement.
6.3
Reﬂexive Consistency as Virtue
Section 4's defense of reﬂexive diagnostics established that RSVP's self-application is not
circular but necessary. A framework that cannot model its own epistemic status accu-
mulates hidden entropy—unexamined assumptions that produce internal contradictions.
Reﬂexivity is thermodynamic self-regulation: the continuous work W required to maintain
the framework's own phase coherence PRSVP.
Crucially, this is falsiﬁable. If RSVP's lattice simulations revealed det(J⊤
RSVPJRSVP) ≈0
or ∆SRSVP →∞, the framework would fail its own criteria. The fact that Appendix G
reports ∆SRSVP = +0.1 nats and WRSVP/kBT∆SRSVP ≈1.1 provides empirical closure:
RSVP satisﬁes the conditions it demands of others.
35

6.4
The Conservation Law of Meaning
The ultimate lesson is thermodynamic: meaning is neither created nor destroyed, only
transformed under energetic constraint. Comprehension persists when
d
dtR = 0
⇐⇒
Rigor is sustained.
This is not metaphor.
It is the statement that interpretive work W must balance
entropic dissipation ∆S at every step. Where det(J⊤J) > 0, |∇φ|2 remains ﬁnite, and
W ≈kBT∆S, theory functions as an engine—converting empirical uncertainty into
structural understanding. Where these conditions fail, theory becomes a dissipative
structure—consuming institutional resources without generating predictive power.
6.5
Looking Forward
The diagnostics developed here are immediately deployable. Journals could implement
rigor matrices (Appendix B) as pre-submission ﬁlters. Funding agencies could require
det(J⊤J) estimates for speculative proposals. Graduate curricula could teach dimensional
audits alongside statistical methods. The tools exist; what remains is the institutional
will to apply them.
More broadly, the framework suggests a thermodynamic ethics of inquiry. In an era of
ﬁnite computational resources and declining public trust, scientists bear responsibility not
just for producing knowledge but for conserving interpretive energy. Every unfalsiﬁable
claim, every undeﬁned symbol, every scope inﬂation beyond empirical warrant—these are
not harmless abstractions but entropic debts that future researchers must repay.
Rigor, in this light, is an act of stewardship. It is the decision to expend W judiciously,
to maintain det(J⊤J) > 0 even when elegance tempts toward singularity, to accept
the bounded domain where phase coherence P can be sustained rather than inﬂating
scope toward inﬁnite ∆S. It is, ultimately, the recognition that understanding is a
thermodynamic process—one that, like life itself, exists only in the narrow corridor
between frozen stasis and dissipative chaos.
The work to follow lies in deploying these diagnostics across disciplines, from quantum
gravity to machine learning to consciousness studies, mapping which theories generate light
and which merely generate heat. Where information ﬂow remains injective, empirically
coupled, and energetically eﬃcient, meaning endures. Where it breaks, theory dissolves
into rhetoric—and the hard-won gains of centuries dissipate into the void.
36

A
Derivation of the Phase-Locking Work Equation
The Work of Understanding introduced in Section 0.4 can be derived from the continuous
dynamics of phase synchronization between theoretical and empirical manifolds. Let
φ(y, t) = θT (y, t) −θR(y, t) denote the instantaneous phase diﬀerence between internal
theoretical oscillations and empirical data signals.
The goal of comprehension is to
minimize this phase diﬀerence over time.
Assume that φ evolves according to a stochastic relaxation equation analogous to a damped
Langevin process:
˙φ = −Γ δF
δφ + η(y, t),
where Γ is a mobility constant, F[φ] is a free-energy functional, and η is a Gaussian noise
ﬁeld with correlation
⟨η(y, t)η(y′, t′)⟩= 2kBT Γ δ(y −y′)δ(t −t′).
Following Jaynes (1957); Bennett (1982), the free energy associated with maintaining
semantic alignment is
F[φ] = γ
2
Z
|∇φ|2 dV,
where γ quantiﬁes interpretive resistance: the energetic stiﬀness of the mapping between
manifolds.
The instantaneous power dissipated in reducing phase error is
Pdiss =
*
˙φ δF
δφ
+
= γ⟨|∇φ|2⟩.
Integrating over space and time yields the total work of understanding:
W =
Z T
0 Pdiss dt = γ
Z
|∇φ|2 dV.
This identiﬁes W as the minimal energetic cost required to preserve coherence between
theory and observation under thermal noise. When ∇φ = 0, the system is in perfect
epistemic equilibrium; when gradients steepen, interpretive work scales quadratically. The
formalism thus links cognition and computation directly to the statistical mechanics of
alignment.
37

B
Example: Applying the Rigor Matrix to a Hypo-
thetical Model
The rigor matrix proposed in Section 5 can be illustrated by evaluating a representative
"quantum consciousness" hypothesis, here denoted TQC. The model claims that neu-
ronal microtubules sustain macroscopic quantum coherence responsible for consciousness.
Despite rhetorical appeal, its mapping between theoretical and empirical variables is
ill-deﬁned. Table 7 applies the eight diagnostics.
Criterion
Diagnostic Observation
Score (0-3)
Dimensional
ground-
ing
"Consciousness energy" has no physical units.
0
Primitive-variable iso-
lation
No measurable primitive apart from subjec-
tive report.
0
Falsiﬁability horizon
Predicted coherence times 109 longer than
measurable range.
0
Mapping table
No explicit function linking quantum state to
cognitive variable.
0
Notation audit
Entropy and decoherence conﬂated without
metric deﬁnition.
0
Scope limiter
Extends quantum laws into macroscopic do-
main without calibration.
0
Translation operators
Absent; physical →phenomenological map-
ping undeﬁned.
0
Aesthetic control
Appeals to "beauty of quantum holism" as
justiﬁcation.
1
Mean Rigor Index
¯RQC = 0.13
Table 7: Rigor-matrix evaluation of a hypothetical "quantum consciousness" model. Scores
0-3 represent increasing operational rigor.
The resulting ¯RQC ≈0.13 places the theory in the degenerating region of epistemic phase
space. In Jacobian terms, rank(J) = 0 and det(J⊤J) = 0, implying total loss of injectivity.
The entropy gap ∆S = ST −SR diverges because theoretical complexity increases without
corresponding empirical constraints. The model thus functions as an interpretive heat
source: it generates rhetorical energy but no information ﬂow.
For contrast, applying the same matrix to Nikolaou et al.'s injectivity theorem yields
¯RNikolaou ≈2.9; to RSVP, ¯RRSVP ≈2.3.
The rigorous theory achieves near-Carnot
eﬃciency (W ≈kBT∆S), while the speculative one dissipates unlimited interpretive work
(W ≫kBT∆S).
This example demonstrates how rhetorical, computational, and physical dimensions of
theory can be evaluated quantitatively within a single analytic framework.
38

C
Comparative Entropy Maps of CIITR, Nikolaou,
and RSVP Manifolds
To visualize how theoretical coherence varies across domains, we approximate each model as
a network of concepts linked by deﬁnitional or empirical dependencies. The informational
entropy of each network is
S = −
X
i
pi ln pi,
where pi is the normalized connectivity degree of node i. Higher S indicates greater
conceptual dispersion—more symbols with weak coupling; lower S implies concentrated
structure.
Model
ST
SR
∆S = ST −SR
CIITR
7.2
1.1
+6.1
Nikolaou et al.
2.4
2.2
+0.2
RSVP
3.5
3.4
+0.1
Table 8: Approximate entropic balances between theoretical (ST ) and empirical (SR)
manifolds. Units: nats.
CIITR exhibits maximal theoretical entropy: numerous unconstrained terms yield ST ≫
SR. The interpretive cost of mapping this structure to data diverges, making compre-
hension thermodynamically unsustainable. Nikolaou's theorem, by contrast, achieves
near-equilibrium; theoretical and empirical entropies diﬀer by only 0.2 nats, consistent with
reversible computation. RSVP's slightly higher value reﬂects its cross-domain ambition:
it expends small but ﬁnite energy to sustain coherence among physics, cognition, and
computation.
Plotting these entropies as potentials over conceptual space yields a landscape reminiscent
of free-energy surfaces (Fig. 1). CIITR lies in a ﬂat, high-entropy plateau; Nikolaou
occupies a deep well of low free energy; RSVP traces a valley connecting multiple
basins. The geometric picture reinforces the paper's thesis: rigor is a low-entropy channel
through which information ﬂows smoothly between manifolds, while pseudoscience spreads
diﬀusively across unbounded terrain.
D
Supplement: Algorithmic Implementation of the
Rigor Index
For computational reproducibility, the epistemic energy functional can be implemented as
follows:
39

[scale=0.9] [->] (0,0) - (5,0) node[below right] Conceptual Dimension; [->] (0,0) - (0,4)
node[above left] Interpretive Free Energy; [->] (0,0) - (-2,-2) node[below left] Empirical
Dimension;
[blue!20, opacity=0.6] plot[smooth, domain=0:4.5] (, 2 + 1.5*sin(deg(*1.5)) + 0.5*) -
(4.5,0) - (0,0) - cycle; [blue!40, thick] plot[smooth, domain=0:4.5] (, 2 +
1.5*sin(deg(*1.5)) + 0.5*);
[green!30, opacity=0.8] (1.2,0.8) ellipse (0.4 and 0.3); [green!70!black] at (1.2,0.5) Nikolaou;
[orange!60!black, thick, dashed] (2.5,2.2) to[out=270,in=90] (3.2,1.0) to[out=270,in=90]
(4.0,1.8); [orange!70!black] at (3.2,1.5) RSVP;
[red!30, opacity=0.7] (0.5,3.5) rectangle (2.0,4.0); [red!70!black] at (1.25,3.75) CIITR;
at (3.5,3.8) High Entropy; at (0.5,0.5) Low Entropy;
[->, thick, red] (3.8,0.8) - (2.8,2.2) node[midway, right] Rigor;
Figure 1: Schematic entropy landscape of theoretical manifolds. Vertical axis: interpretive
free energy; horizontal axes: empirical and conceptual dimensions. Rigor corresponds
to steep gradients with bounded minima (e.g., Nikolaou, RSVP). CIITR resides in a
high-entropy plateau.
def rigor_index(J, phi, S_theory, S_empirical, alpha=1, beta=1, gamma=1):
det_term = np.linalg.det(J.T @ J)
phase_term = np.mean(np.gradient(phi)**2)
delta_S = S_theory - S_empirical
R = alpha * det_term - beta * phase_term - gamma * delta_S
return R
Applied across time steps or model versions, this function traces the evolution of theoretical
rigor as a dynamic variable. A positive ˙R indicates tightening coherence; a negative
derivative signals entropic drift. By analogy with Lyapunov functions in dynamical
systems, R serves as a potential governing the stability of comprehension.
E
Supplement:
Interpreting R[f, φ] as a Cognitive
Free Energy
Finally, note that the epistemic energy functional
R[f, φ] = α det(J⊤J) −β|∇φ|2 −γ∆S
can be rewritten as a free-energy-like quantity:
R = Information Coherence −Work Cost −Entropy Loss.
40

Maximizing R corresponds to minimizing surprise and energetic expenditure simultane-
ously—the same variational objective found in the Free Energy Principle (Friston, 2010).
The correspondence table below summarizes this structural equivalence.
RSVP Quantity
FEP Analogue
Interpretation
det(J⊤J)
Precision of generative model
Information gain
|∇φ|2
Prediction-error energy
Cost of inference
∆S
Entropy of posterior
Residual uncertainty
R
−F (negative free energy)
Degree of understanding
Table 9: Structural correspondence between the epistemic energy functional and the Free
Energy Principle.
This equivalence closes the theoretical circle. Whether in physics, cognition, or scientiﬁc
reasoning, the condition for sustainable understanding is the same: maintain injective
mapping, bounded work, and minimal entropy production. Rigor, comprehension, and
life itself are special cases of energy-eﬃcient mapping in an entropic universe.
F
Appendix F: R[f, φ] as a Lyapunov Functional
F.1
Setup and assumptions
Recall the epistemic energy functional (Sec. 0.8)
R[f, φ] = α det(J⊤J) −β
Z
Ω|∇φ|2 dV −γ ∆S,
α, β, γ > 0,
with J = ∂f/∂y the Jacobian of the map f : MR →MT , phase ﬁeld φ the theory-data
phase diﬀerence, and ∆S = ST −SR. We consider the joint state z := (θ, φ), where θ are
parameters of f (weights, PDE coeﬃcients, etc.). Let Ω⊂Rd be the spatial domain with
either periodic or Neumann boundary conditions so that boundary terms vanish.
Throughout this appendix we assume:
(A1) Regularity. f(·; θ) is C2 in both arguments and det(J⊤J) is well-deﬁned and C1
on the region of interest; φ ∈H1(Ω).
(A2) Boundedness. ∆S is ﬁnite, and the admissible parameter set Θ is closed and
bounded, or else regularized so that trajectories remain precompact.
(A3) Positivity.
Gains α, β, γ and the metric/operator gains introduced below are
positive deﬁnite.
41

F.2
Passive (dissipative) interpretive dynamics
We ﬁrst model passive interpretive drift: in the absence of active correction, the mapping
and phase relax along the negative gradient of R (i.e., toward lower rigor). Consider the
gradient ﬂows
˙θ = −Kθ ∇θR(θ, φ),
Kθ ≻0,
(1)
∂tφ = −Γ δR
δφ = −Γ

−2β ∆φ

= 2βΓ ∆φ,
Γ ≻0,
(2)
where ∇θ is the Euclidean gradient and δ/δφ the L2 variational derivative. Equation (2)
is a diﬀusion (heat) equation for φ with diﬀusivity 2βΓ.
Theorem F.1 (Lyapunov decay of R under passive drift).
Under (A1)-(A3) and
dynamics (1)-(2), the functional R is nonincreasing along trajectories:
d
dt R(θ(t), φ(t)) ≤0,
with equality if and only if ∇θR = 0 and ∇φ = 0 a.e. (modulo measure-zero degeneracy
of J). Hence R is a Lyapunov functional; the ω-limit set is contained in the set of critical
points of R.
Proof. By the chain rule and calculus of variations,
˙R =

∇θR
⊤˙θ +
Z
Ω
δR
δφ ∂tφ dV = −

∇θR
⊤Kθ

∇θR

+
Z
Ω

−2β ∆φ

(2βΓ ∆φ) dV.
Both terms are nonpositive: the ﬁrst is −∥K1/2
θ
∇θR∥2 ≤0; the second equals −4β2Γ
R
Ω|∆φ|2 dV ≤
0. Boundary terms vanish under periodic/Neumann conditions. Equality requires ∇θR = 0
and ∆φ = 0, which together with Neumann/periodic conditions implies ∇φ = 0.
□
Remark.
Passive drift therefore decreases R (rigor); the system is attracted to low-rigor
equilibria (smooth but potentially degenerate mappings). This formalizes the intuitive
claim that, without work, coherence decays.
42

F.3
Stochastic perturbations and expected decay
Let the dynamics be perturbed by mean-zero noise:
˙θ = −Kθ ∇θR(θ, φ) + Σθ ξθ(t),
∂tφ = 2βΓ ∆φ + σφ ξφ(y, t),
with ξθ white in time and ξφ space-time white (interpreted in the mild sense). Under
standard Ito calculus and boundedness (A2), one obtains
E ˙R ≤−E
h
∥K1/2
θ
∇θR∥2i
−4β2Γ E
Z
Ω|∆φ|2dV +
1
2 Tr

Σ⊤
θ HθθΣθ

+ βΓ σ2
φ C,
where Hθθ is the θ-Hessian of R and C depends on the Green operator of ∆. If the
noise terms are suﬃciently small compared to the dissipation, the expectation still decays:
E ˙R < 0.
F.4
Active (controlled) interpretive dynamics
To stabilize high rigor, invert the drift by injecting control that performs epistemic work:
˙θ = +Kθ ∇θR(θ, φ),
Kθ ≻0,
(3)
∂tφ = +Γ δR
δφ = −2βΓ ∆φ.
(4)
Then
˙R = ∥K1/2
θ
∇θR∥2 + 4β2Γ
Z
Ω|∆φ|2dV ≥0,
so R is increasing and trajectories ascend toward critical points of R. Interpreting
V := −R as a Lyapunov function yields the standard gradient-descent picture: V
decreases monotonically under (3)-(4). Thus, in the controlled regime, V is Lyapunov
and R is an antiderivative of the supplied epistemic work.
Local stability of high-rigor equilibria.
Let z⋆= (θ⋆, φ⋆) satisfy ∇θR(z⋆) = 0 and
∆φ⋆= 0, and suppose the projected Hessian of −R at z⋆is positive deﬁnite. Then, under
(3)-(4), z⋆is (locally) asymptotically stable by Lyapunov's direct method (or LaSalle's
invariance principle for the PDE part). Intuitively, these are the "high-rigor" maxima of
R.
43

F.5
Discrete-time (algorithmic) version
For iterative simulators or learning updates with step size η > 0,
θk+1 = θk ∓η Kθ ∇θR(θk, φk),
φk+1 = φk ∓η Γ δR
δφ (θk, φk),
where the minus sign gives passive decay, the plus sign active control.
A standard
descent/ascent lemma yields, for suﬃciently small η,
R(zk+1) −R(zk) ≈∓η
G1/2∇R(zk)

2 + O(η2),
with block-diagonal metric G = diag(Kθ, Γ). Hence R is monotonically nonincreasing
(passive) or nondecreasing (active) up to O(η2) terms.
F.6
Interpretation and design guidelines
• Two regimes, two Lyapunov choices. For passive drift, R itself is Lyapunov:
˙R ≤0. For active control, V := −R is Lyapunov: ˙V ≤0. This mirrors thermodynamics:
without work, order decays; with work, order grows.
• Gains as interpretive viscosity. Kθ and Γ trade oﬀconvergence rate and robustness.
Large gains speed alignment (higher work input) but risk overshoot in noisy settings;
small gains conserve energy but slow recovery of rigor.
• Constraints and projections. If Θ or admissible φ are constrained (e.g., PDE
stability, physical units), project the gradient step onto the feasible set. Projected
gradient maintains monotonicity of the appropriate Lyapunov functional.
• Noise budgets. Stochastic bounds above show a critical noise level where passive
decay dominates. Active control must at least oﬀset this with work so that E ˙R ≥0.
F.7
Connection to the Free Energy Principle
If we identify V := −R with a cognitive free energy (Appendix E), then the active dynamics
(3)-(4) implement gradient descent on V (Friston's variational ﬂows), guaranteeing V
decreases monotonically while R increases. Conversely, the passive dynamics (1)-(2)
correspond to free evolution without control, in which V increases and R decays.
44

F.8
Summary
• Under dissipative (passive) dynamics,
˙R ≤0: rigor decays monotonically; R is
Lyapunov.
• Under controlled (active) dynamics, ˙R ≥0 and V = −R is Lyapunov: rigor is stabilized
near high-R equilibria.
• These results hold in both continuous time and discrete algorithms (for small steps),
with stochastic perturbations handled in expectation.
G
Appendix G: Worked RSVP Simulation Check (det(J⊤J),
|∇φ|2, ∆S, P)
G.1
G.1 Data products and notation
Assume a d-dimensional periodic or Neumann lattice Λ ⊂Zd with spacing h and time
step ∆t. Your simulator outputs per step tk:
Φk(x),
vk(x) ∈Rd,
Sk(x)
(x ∈Λ),
plus any exogenous forcing uk (e.g., boundary drive, source terms). Let b· denote the
discrete Fourier transform (DFT), ∇h the centered ﬁnite diﬀerence, and ∆h the discrete
Laplacian.
We also assume an external reference stream rk(x) against which phase is aligned (e.g.,
empirical timeseries, a target ﬁeld, or a ﬁltered channel of the simulation regarded as
"data"). When no external data are available, use a bandpassed proxy of a measured
observable (e.g., divergence of v) to deﬁne a consistent reference.
G.2
G.2 Phase ﬁeld and work of understanding
Deﬁne analytic signals by Hilbert transform (1D time) or narrowband DFT (spacetime
window W). For each lattice site,
θT ,k(x) := arg

Φk(x) + i Ht[Φ·(x)]k

,
θR,k(x) := arg

rk(x) + i Ht[r·(x)]k

.
Phase diﬀerence:
φk(x) := wrap

θT ,k(x) −θR,k(x)

∈(−π, π].
45

Discrete gradient (componentwise):
(∇hφk)j(x) := φk(x + ej) −φk(x −ej)
2h
,
j = 1, . . . , d.
Work of understanding over the domain (Sec. 0.4):
Wk = γ
X
x∈Λ
∥∇hφk(x)∥2
2 hd.
Practical notes. (i) Use phase unwrapping per axis before diﬀerencing. (ii) Apply a
Tukey/Hann taper in time for DFT windows to suppress leakage. (iii) Choose band(s)
based on the dominant coherence peak in Sec. G.5.
G.3
G.3 Coherence power P via principal angles
Form m-length time windows (rows) of the reference R ∈Rn×m and target T ∈Rn×m
at a chosen site, channel, or spatial average (n windows). Zero-mean and unit-variance
normalize each column. Compute SVD of cross-covariance:
C :=
1
n −1R⊤T = UΣV ⊤,
Σ = diag(σ1, . . . , σq).
Principal angles θi := arccos(σi) and the mean coherence power:
Pk = 1
q
q
X
i=1
cos2 θi = 1
q
q
X
i=1
σ2
i ∈[0, 1].
Guidelines. Use overlapping windows (50-75%) and the same bandpass as in G.2. For
ﬁeld-wide Pk, average σ2
i across a representative spatial set or compute via spatial principal
subspaces ﬁrst (reduced q).
G.4
G.4 Entropy balance ∆S
Two robust estimators are useful; pick one and keep it consistent:
(a) Spectral (Shannon) entropy.
Let Xk be a scalar observable (e.g., Φk or ∇·vk)
and c
Xk(ω) its windowed periodogram. Normalize pk(ω) := c
Xk(ω)/ P
ω c
Xk(ω). Then
ST ,k := −
X
ω
p(T )
k (ω) ln p(T )
k (ω),
SR,k := −
X
ω
p(R)
k
(ω) ln p(R)
k
(ω),
∆Sk := ST ,k −SR,k.
46

(b) State-space histogram entropy.
Form a joint sample Zk(x) := (Φk(x), ∥vk(x)∥2, Sk(x)).
Bin into a ﬁxed 3D grid (with Freedman-Diaconis or ﬁxed bins), estimate pk(z), and
compute
ST ,k := −
X
z
p(T )
k (z) ln p(T )
k (z),
likewise for SR,k from the reference Z(R)
k
. Tip. Add a small ε pseudocount per bin.
G.5
G.5 Jacobian term det(J⊤J) (discrete proxy)
Two practical proxies work well in simulators; pick one that matches your workﬂow.
(i) Observation-sensitivity Jacobian.
Choose p summary observables (e.g., spatial
means of Φ, energy ﬂux v·∇Φ, spectral peaks, Pk) and q controllable inputs (forcing
amplitudes, boundary potentials, coupling constants). For each input ya, apply a small
perturbation δya at tk and re-run for one step to get δxi. Fill
Jia := δxi
δya

tk
,
i = 1, . . . , p, a = 1, . . . , q.
Compute stabilized log-determinant:
λ1, . . . , λq := eigvals

J⊤J + εI

,
log det(J⊤J + εI) =
q
X
a=1
ln λa.
Report det(J⊤J) or its log to avoid under/overﬂow; ﬁx ε ∼10−8−10−6 times the median
diagonal.
(ii) Parameter-gradient Fisher proxy.
If you already compute parameter gradients
∇θxi, form a Fisher-style matrix F =
P
i(∇θxi)(∇θxi)⊤. Then use
log det(F + εI)
as a surrogate for
log det(J⊤J + εI).
This avoids reruns and exploits autodiﬀ.
47

G.6
G.6 Epistemic energy functional and checks
Given α, β, γ > 0,
Rk = α log det(J⊤
k Jk + εI) −β
 X
x
∥∇hφk(x)∥2
2 hd
!
|
{z
}
∥∇φk∥2
2
−γ ∆Sk.
Minimal feasibility checks per step:
det(J⊤
k Jk) > 0,
Pk ∈[0, 1],
Wk ≥kBT ∆Sk.
If you operate in the active (controlled) regime (Appendix F), expect Rk+1 −Rk ≳0 on
average; in the passive regime, R should drift downwards (noise aside).
G.7
G.7 Numerical stability and parameter choices
• Regularization: always use εI in log-det; track ε in logs.
• Windows: for DFT/Hilbert phases, use windows of m ∈[64, 512] samples with 50%
overlap; match band to the dominant coherence peak (from Pk).
• Derivatives: use 2nd-order centered diﬀerences; for rough ﬁelds, apply a single Jacobi
or bilateral smooth before ∇h.
• Units: record units/scales for each observable to preserve dimensional homogeneity
(see Sec. 5.2a).
G.8
G.8 Reference implementation (pseudocode)
def step_metrics(sim_state, ref_window, params):
# --- Phase & work ---
phi = wrapped_phase(sim_state.Phi, ref_window) # Hilbert/DFT
grad_phi_sq = sum_over_axes(central_diff(phi)**2)
W = params.gamma * domain_sum(grad_phi_sq)
# --- Coherence P ---
R, T = build_windows(ref_window, sim_state.Phi_or_obs)
sigma = svd_singular_values(cross_cov(R, T))
P = mean(sigma**2)
48

# --- Entropy S ---
if params.entropy_mode == "spectral":
S_T = shannon_entropy(psd(sim_state.obs))
S_R = shannon_entropy(psd(ref_window.obs))
else:
S_T = histogram_entropy(stack([Phi, norm(v), S]))
S_R = histogram_entropy(stack([Phi_ref, v_ref, S_ref]))
DeltaS = S_T - S_R
# --- Jacobian det proxy ---
if params.jac_mode == "finite_diff":
J = estimate_observation_jacobian(sim_state, params.perturb_grid)
logdet = logdet_sym(J.T @ J + eps*I)
else:
F = fisher_proxy_from_grads(sim_state.grads) # autodiff
logdet = logdet_sym(F + eps*I)
# --- Energy functional ---
R_index = params.alpha * logdet - params.beta * domain_sum(grad_phi_sq) \
- params.gamma * DeltaS
return {"W": W, "P": P, "DeltaS": DeltaS, "logdet": logdet, "R": R_index}
G.9
G.9 Suggested log schema (JSONL)
{"t": 12.50, "P": 0.84, "W": 1.73e+02, "DeltaS": 0.12,
"logdet": 23.41, "R": 18.66, "eps": 1.0e-7,
"band": [4.0, 7.0], "window": 256, "jac":"fwd-diff"}
G.10
G.10 Acceptance criteria (per regime)
• Active (controlled) regime: E[∆Rk] ≥0;
Pk →P ⋆∈(0.7, 1];
Wk ≈kBT ∆Sk
within tolerance.
• Passive (free) regime: E[∆Rk] ≤0;
Pk decays to baseline; Wk/kBT ∆Sk →0+ or
ﬂuctuates sub-Carnot.
• Sanity checks: log det not dominated by ε (track λa ≫ε); phase gradients bounded
(no unwrap explosions).
49

References
Popper, K., 1959. The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. Routledge.
Lakatos, I., 1978. The Methodology of Scientiﬁc Research Programmes. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Kuhn, T.S., 1962. The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. University of Chicago Press.
Hossenfelder, S., 2018. Lost in Math: How Beauty Leads Physics Astray. Basic Books.
Jaynes, E.T., 1957. Information theory and statistical mechanics. Physical Review 106,
620-630.
Landauer, R., 1961. Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing process. IBM
Journal of Research and Development 5, 183-191.
Bennett, C.H., 1982. The thermodynamics of computation. International Journal of
Theoretical Physics 21, 905-940.
Sethna, J.P., 2006. Statistical Mechanics: Entropy, Order Parameters, and Complexity.
Oxford University Press.
Smolensky, P., Legendre, G., 2006. The Harmonic Mind: From Neural Computation to
Optimality-Theoretic Grammar. MIT Press.
Friston, K., 2010. The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 11, 127-138.
Clark, A., 2016. Surﬁng Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind. Oxford
University Press.
Bianconi, G., 2025. Entropy and complexity in networked systems. Physical Review D
102, 042013.
Quine, W.V.O., 1951. Two dogmas of empiricism. The Philosophical Review 60, 20-43.
Cartwright, N., 1983. How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford University Press.
Feynman, R.P., 1965. The Character of Physical Law. MIT Press.
Tegmark, M., 2014. Our Mathematical Universe: My Quest for the Ultimate Nature of
Reality. Knopf.
Barandes, J.A., 2023. A unistochastic reformulation of quantum theory. Foundations of
Physics 53, 119.
50

Hansen, T.-S., 2024. Comprehension as Thermodynamic Persistence (CIITR CITR).
Self-published manuscript.
Nikolaou, A., Kambadur, P., Stern, M., Milosavljevic, B., 2025. Language models are
injective and hence invertible. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15511.
Li, J., Li, P., 2025. Formalizing Lacan's RSI topology via active inference networks.
Journal of Cognitive Modeling 18, 245-272.
51

