AUTOMATION IS A MYTH
 
Luke Munn
 
Stanford University Press
 Stanford, California
 ©2022 by Luke Munn. All rights 
reserved.  
 No part of this book may be reproduced 
or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying and recording, or 
in any information storage or retrieval 
system without the prior written 
permission of Stanford University 
Press. Subjects: Labor supply—Effect 
of automation on. | Employees— Effect 

of technological innovations on. | 
Automation—Social aspects.  
 Contents
 Introduction: Automation Is a Myth
 Part 1 The Myth of Automated 
Autonomy
 1 The Fantasy of Full Automation
 2 Spotty Automation and Less-Than-
Human Workers
 Part 2 The Myth of Automation 
Everywhere
 3 Technology in Context, Technology as 
Culture
 4 Automation on the Ground
 Part 3 The Myth of Automating 
Everyone
 5 Automation's Racialized Fallout
 6 Automation's Gendered Inequality

 Conclusion: Automation Is Not Our 
Future
 INTRODUCTION
 AT A LUXURY SKI RESORT in the heart 
of Switzerland, the snow has just 
started to fall, big flakes drift-ing 
down through the thin mountain air. An 
elite group of global leaders—
presidents, heads of state, 
policymakers, CEOs, business magnates, 
media personalities, celebrities—had 
descended on the alpine village over 
the past few days. Now they were 
filing into the conference center, 
quickly snapping up the last empty 
seats in the packed auditorium. After a 
brief introduction, the house lights 
dimmed and a bank of massive screens 
behind the stage lit up. As a figure 
walked onto the stage, the title of his 

talk, "How to Survive the 21st 
Century," flickered onto the screens. 
The "automation revolution," he 
proclaimed, "will be a cascade of ever 
bigger disruptions. Old jobs will 
disappear, new jobs will emerge—but 
then the new jobs will rapidly change 
and vanish." A Windows-style error 
message now appeared on-screen with a 
bright yellow warning sign: "Technology 
might disrupt society and the meaning 
of life itself," it cautioned, offering 
Ignore or Reset buttons. With a group 
of global elites hanging on every word, 
the speaker ramped up his rhetoric and 
rammed home one of his takeaway 
points. "Whereas in the past, humans 
had to struggle against exploitation," 
he warned, "in the 21st century, the 
really big struggle will be against 

irrelevance." Race Against the 
Machine. A World Without Work. Rise of 
the Robots.  
 The Future Is Faster Than You Think. 
The Inevitable. From industry forums  
2 Introduction to technology journalism 
and the front pages of the popular 
press, automation rhetoric abounds, and 
for good reason. This is a tale of 
drama, where technologies suddenly 
sweep in and society undergoes massive 
upheaval.  
This is a tale of crisis, where work as 
our long-standing means of identity 
and economic support is now placed in 
jeopardy. And this is a tale that is 
universal, obliterating geographical and 
cultural distinctions to insist that 

automation will affect everyone, 
everywhere. "It doesn't matter what 
you do for work," asserted one pundit; 
in a matter of years, your job will not 
be the same.  
"Automation is the terrifying force no 
one is willing to name," argued 
another, "the race between automation 
and human work is won by automation." 
These stories simultaneously hold out 
the promise of economic prosperity 
while warning about a set of 
potentially disastrous effects. They 
form a powerful narrative driven by 
hype and fear.  
Automation is a myth, a long-running 
fable about the future of work that 
needs to be reconsidered. Whether 

embraced as dream or cautioned as 
nightmare, automation is ultimately a 
fiction, a fantasy. "Myth" does not 
imply that automated technologies do 
not exist or that there have not been 
technically driven transformations in 
the nature of work over the past 
century. But these transformations 
have been piecemeal rather than 
total. They have taken place 
differently within different cultures 
and locations. And they have impacted 
particular races and genders rather 
than a generic humanity. In speaking of 
"myth," then, I'm taking aim at the 
universal understanding of automation 
constructed by population automation 
discourse, a fable that abounds in 
press headlines and popular best 
sellers. Indeed, this version of 

automation must be a fable because it 
rests on a set of triple fictions: the 
myth of autonomy, the myth of 
automation everywhere, and the myth 
of automating everyone. These claims 
are disconnected from the 
sociomaterial conditions of the real 
world, divorced from the lived 
experiences of specific bodies in 
specific spaces. As a result, this 
framing of automation is a hollow 
concept, resting on nothing.  
Untethered from the hard ground of 
reality, it lacks any capacity to reveal 
the power relations, technical 
operations, and logistical chains that 
contour contemporary labor. 
"Automation" signifies so much but 
explains so little.  

Why does this myth matter? In grabbing 
headlines and framing the debate, this 
myth is not just misguided but 
dangerous. The automation myth 
Automation is a Myth offers a cohesive 
narrative, a "unified vision" for a set 
of conditions that are actually 
fragmented and uneven, and this myth 
exerts persuasive force, working "to 
explain, to reconcile, to guide action or 
to legitimate." In claiming to be 
apolitical, automation camouflages its 
ethics. This fable about the future of 
work often props up existing 
hegemonies, reinforcing relationships 
of domination when it comes to 
technology, labor, race, and gender. In 
claiming to be global, automation 
overlooks its context. Its abstracted, 

10,000-foot view obscures the small 
but significant transformations taking 
place in that factory in that city—
material shifts that reconfigure labor 
conditions for particular people in 
particular places. And in claiming to be 
inevitable, automation conceals its 
interests.  
Its vision of a ubiquitous, impersonal 
force overlooks how change really 
occurs—through identifiable actors, 
with certain motivations, making 
concrete decisions.  
In accepting the framing of automation, 
we not only miss the key questions but 
the chance to intervene within these 
conditions and shape these outcomes. 
Indeed, perhaps the most damaging 

aspect of the automation myth is its 
fatalism. Much of what will happen is 
"inevitable," we are told, driven by 
"technological trends that are already 
in motion." Here, history becomes a 
tale of technical improvement with 
power, speed, standardization, 
uniformity, and control as the given 
variables for optimization. Nothing can 
alter these axioms or stop this 
forward progress. In the myth of the 
machine, the machine is "absolutely 
irresistible." The future of work is a 
future on rails. To reject the myth of 
automation, then, is to reject this 
fated future and insist on 
alternatives. Other variations and 
inflections—more communal, more 
equal, more sustainable—are possible.  

All of these blind spots prevent us 
from properly perceiving new 
entanglements of machinic and human 
labor. For instance, I could tell a very 
different story about automation. 
"I'm a shared-bike redistributor," 
states the man, a heavy-set youth 
with a goatee dressed in an old Guess 
T-shirt. Puffing on a cigarette, he 
sizes up a jumbled mess of bikes heaped 
on the street, then starts to pull 
them apart. "I work through the night, 
putting these shared Meituan bicycles 
back in places where they'll be 
needed at rush hour." Grunting, he 
grabs the frame of a bicycle, hauling it 
onto a trailer attached to a 
threewheeled cargo motorcycle. One by 
one, he finds and loads bikes, working 
up 4 Introduction a sweat despite the 

cool night air. "People attribute my 
work to the magic of an app," he notes, 
"but these bikes don't teleport 
themselves." He scans the street for 
a final bike to complete the load—then 
groans when he spots one dangling 
halfway up a tree, wedged between 
two branches. By standing on a concrete 
planter, he can just reach the front 
wheel, gripping the tire and levering it 
out of the crook in the tree. Slowly 
lowering it to the ground, he feels a 
twinge in his back but presses on, 
completing the load and firing up his 
cargo bike. "I guess I'm a 
fauxtamaton," he admits, "invisible 
labor that keeps up the facade of 
shiny technological efficiency." 
Reaching the inner city, he cuts the 
engine and starts to unload each bike, 

setting them up in a neat row ready 
for early-morning commuters. With a 
grunt, he grabs the final bike with one 
hand and swings it over his shoulder, 
grinning briefly: "I'd like to see an 
algorithm try this." This is just one 
story, about one person, in one place.  
Yet its specificity stands in sharp 
contrast to the grand rhetoric of 
"humanity" and "technology" in the 
opening scene. It points to a set of 
particular pressures placed on the 
body by technically mediated labor. It 
highlights some of the potentials and 
punishments enabled by digital 
affordances. And it gestures to a more 
nuanced set of social and political 
issues. It suggests that working through 
this myth would be productive, that 

questioning its universal categories and 
critiquing its seemingly inevitable 
trajectory could be beneficial, 
providing us with more articulated 
insights about automated technologies 
and the future(s) of work.  
Materials and Lenses
 To clear away this myth and replace it 
with a sharper portrait, this book 
draws together a diverse variety of 
materials, an eclectic mix that aims to 
offer a cross-section of different 
labor forms. Warehouse work is just 
one of these forms, but it offers a 
prime example of what material was 
chosen, how it was approached, and 
what this engagement aimed to 
accomplish.  

With the rise and rise of e-commerce, 
these sites have become key 
distribution centers, coordinating a 
massive performance that delivers 
millions of goods every day.  
Speed and efficiency are the prime 
directives here, and so the warehouse 
has long been a field site for the 
future of work, a test bed for new 
technologies seeking to rationalize and 
routinize labor. The dream is to 
Automation is a Myth 5 perform "like 
the motherboard of a computer, 
combining and redistributing goods as 
bytes and containers like software 
containers." Automation aims to smooth 
out the lumpy tasks of packing and 
stacking into a seamless logistical flow. 
Yet this choreography remains 

frustratingly complex and human bodies 
frustratingly difficult to erase. This 
makes the warehouse a key site of 
struggle, a space that crystallizes the 
tensions and limitations of automation.  
To develop a portrait of these 
conditions, I synthesize a wide array of 
"gray" literature, from journalistic 
investigations to computer science 
papers, patents, business reports, and 
worker testimony. I want to zoom in on 
the point where the technical butts up 
against the social and material, 
examining the interplay among 
automated systems, automated spaces, 
and automated subjects. I aim to 
freeze-frame those moments when 
the world bites back in the form of 
error, injury, and contingency. Of 

course, the warehouse is just one 
workplace of many. To augment this 
portrait, the book ventures into other 
sites, from the factory to the field 
and from the supermarket to the 
smart home. Together these aim to 
touch on the broad spectrum of 
practices and conditions that fall 
under that enormous umbrella we call 
work.  
How do we interpret this material and 
make sense of these conditions?  Here I 
turn to media, race, gender, and 
cultural studies and the deep insights 
they offer. These scholars throw a 
spanner in the machinery of the 
automation myth, bringing its grand 
claims to a temporary halt. They urge 
us to pause, to carefully inspect 

relations and conditions, and to pay 
attention to adverse impacts, pointing 
out that this is "not a mere technical 
emergence but the practical result of 
an ongoing and bloody struggle between 
the would-haveit-alls and the to-be-
dispossessed." Automation privileges 
some and punishes others. Such 
scholarly work grounds automation in 
its colonial history, highlights its racial 
and gender inequalities, and stresses 
its political agency. By reading this 
material through a critical lens, this 
book aims to offer a more nuanced, 
localized, and racialized understanding 
of automated technologies and their 
intersections with labor regimes. 
Specific lives and the spaces they 
inhabit provide an anchor, bringing 
automation back down to earth.  

6 Introduction Fiction by Fiction
 This book steps through each of 
automation's fictions in turn. Part 1 
examines the myth of automated 
autonomy. For decades automation 
rhetoric has assured us that total 
automation is imminent, that machines 
will soon operate completely 
independently, taking over production 
and rendering the human obsolete. But 
work has proven to consist of a range 
of non-trivial problems, full of 
inconsistencies and edge cases. 
Increasingly it seems that the horizon 
of full automation will never be 
attained. Instead we see a revision of 
this dream—a more modest set of 
technical interventions that actively 
acknowledge humans and our rich 

capabilities. Far from being selfacting, 
these technical systems require heavy 
amounts of development and 
maintenance. Alongside this highly paid 
work is precarious and exploitative 
piecework carried out by a digital 
underclass. These insights highlight 
the immense amount of human labor 
behind "autonomous" processes. 
Automation is incomplete, and Chapter 2 
moves from checkout operators to 
machine minders and content 
moderators to explore what this 
partially automated labor looks and 
feels like.  
Part 2 investigates the myth of 
automation everywhere. Automated 
technologies are frequently framed as 
a wave or an age, a de-situated force 

that will sweep across society or ripple 
across the globe. But this fiction 
ignores the social, cultural, and 
geographical forces that shape 
technologies at a local level.  
Automation is both technical and 
geopolitical, and any discussion must 
situate the impacts of these 
technologies within a specific context. 
To highlight this point, these chapters 
move through examples of automation 
in China, jumping from shanzhai 
practices in Shenzhen to logistics in 
Hangzhou. Each demonstrates how 
technologies emerge from domestic 
ecosystems, reflecting the distinct 
values and visions of the cultural 
landscape that surrounds them.  

The second chapter in this part dives 
deep into two instances of automation in 
Xinjiang to demonstrate how a cultural 
and contextual understanding is key. 
To grasp what automation is doing in 
these cases, we need to go beyond the 
technical and draw on the historical, 
social, and racial dynamics at work in a 
particular place.  
Part 3 explores the myth of automating 
everyone, the generic figure of "the 
human" at the heart of automation 
claims. Throughout the decades, 
Automation is a Myth 7 automation 
discourse has been dominated by terms 
like "humanity" and "mankind." 
Automation would affect us all 
equally. But this framing obscures the 
fact that labor is socially stratified 

along racial and gendered lines. 
Automation emerges from a colonial 
history that valued some humans more 
highly than others, and automated 
technologies are deployed in industries 
that are already structurally 
unequal. This means that automation's 
fallout will also be uneven, falling 
more heavily on some than others. By 
zooming into a single warehouse, we can 
see how these transformations 
particularly attack Black lives, 
producing injuries and terminations but 
also fostering forms of activism. 
Chapter 6 turns to gender, a shift 
that highlights how automation's 
definition of work—waged work in the 
workplace—is narrow and patriarchal, 
dismissing an entire realm of labor and 
the contributions of those who 

undertake it. The chapter pivots from 
industry to domesticity to challenge 
this blinkered concept, investigating 
the non-automation of "non-work," 
the masculine vision of home 
automation, and the feminization of 
digital assistants.  
Together, these stories push back 
against the myth of automation, using it 
as a kind of springboard toward a 
sharper articulation. By examining 
conditions on the ground, we can 
develop a more fine grained portrait of 
the technical reshaping of work. The 
aim here is not to add more detail for 
the sake of it, but to offer a 
conceptualization able to account for 
particular forces exerted over 
particular subjects within particular 

spaces. The interplay that emerges is 
messier but more interesting.  
Here we find control but also 
contingency, we see cultural logics 
that dictate technical logics, and we 
witness racial "histories" that persist 
in the present. These forces deeply 
shape the power relations surrounding 
labor: the way that work is carried 
out, the agency that workers have, 
their ability to sustain their 
livelihoods, and the forms of 
community that can be fostered. In 
other words, automation is not just 
technical but political. By sharpening 
our understanding of automation, we 
sharpen our understanding of its 
stakes and table a sharper set of 
claims. To insist that certain groups are 

accounted for, that certain values are 
upheld, that certain configurations of 
technology and labor must be entirely 
redesigned—these are specific demands 
that require reimagining form and 
function in concrete ways. 
"Automation"—that myth claiming to 
narrate the future of work for all 
people in all places—needs to be 
rewritten.  
PART 1 The Myth of Automated 
Autonomy
 The Fantasy of Full Automation
 Automation is a myth because its 
central conceit of humanless work is 
unattainable. At the root of the word 
automation is a claim to become 
selfacting, to move and act on its own,1 
and automation discourse continues to 

insist that this level of independence 
is right around the corner. In this 
alarming fable, machines—from robotics 
to software systems and algorithmic 
processes—are rising up. Better, 
faster, and more productive, they will 
soon perform all aspects of labor. "As 
they slowly, but relentlessly, take on 
more and more tasks," warns one 
economist, in a statement typical of the 
automation genre, "human beings will 
be forced to retreat to an 
evershrinking set of activities." The 
human, we are assured, is on the way 
out.  
The pursuit of full automation is a 
long-standing dream. One of the first 
patents filed with the newly 
established US Patent Office in 1785 

was for an automated flour mill 
invented by Oliver Evans. By employing 
a complex series of levers and devices, 
Evans was able to reduce the number 
of laborers from four to just one. 
These machines, he explained, 
"perform every necessary movement 
of the grain and meal, from one part 
of the mill to another, and from one 
machine to another, through all the 
various operations . . . without the aid 
of manual labor, excepting to set the 
different machines in motion." Already 
at this early stage, we can see 
technology chipping away at the 
dependence on "manual" labor and 
that most ancient of devices: the 
human body.  

From here a genealogy of automation 
could take many forms, but we might 
focus on the factory and warehouse, 
picking out just a few moments.  
By 1920, the A.  
O. Smith Corporation had constructed an 
automated factory that performed 500 
operations in order to produce over 
10,000 car frames a day; the facility 
was considered a "wonder of its time 
and a prototype for the factory of the 
future." In the mid-1950s, the first 
automated guided vehicle was 
introduced into warehouses, a 
driverless tractor train called the 
Guide-O-Matic that followed a wire 
embedded in the floor.  

A decade later, automated storage and 
retrieval systems (AS/RS) debuted in 
the warehouse.  
In essence, these were computer-
controlled stacker cranes that could 
shuttle up and down to pick up or 
deposit an item. Automatic retrieval 
allowed shelving to stretch to the 
ceiling and rows to become narrower, 
increasing the density of storage.  
This flurry of innovations contributed 
to a sense of inertia, fueling the 
belief that technology would soon 
unburden society of its toilsome labor.  
Indeed, this period, which loosely 
coincides with the Space Age, is marked 
above all by a profound awe of 

technology, a reverence for the 
immense progress that science seemed 
to be making in every sphere of life, 
including work.  
Given this advancement, it would be no 
time at all before automated systems 
would supersede humans altogether. 
"Until the middle of the twentieth 
century, a non-aggression pact 
stabilized a more or less peaceful 
coexistence between humans and 
machines," warned Georges Elgozy in 
1968. "Infinitely more powerful and 
autonomous, the automations of the 
second half of the twentieth century 
will quickly break this equilibrium. Item 
by item, they will replace their less-
evolved ancestors." The interventions 
of the past were trivial, leaving 

existing work relations largely intact. 
But the inventions of the near 
future would soon result in total 
autonomy, with machines achieving full 
spectrum dominance.  
In the 1980s we can see one pinnacle of 
this dream in the form of the "lights-
out" factory. General Motors had once 
been a great carmaker, a titan of the 
Detroit automotive industry. But over 
the years, its market share had been 
rapidly slipping to Japanese competitors, 
who were able to produce vehicles 
faster and cheaper than their 
American counterparts.  
For management, a fully automated 
facility was the clear solution, a way 
to claw back control and The Fantasy 

of Full Automation 13 reassert their 
dominance. Every aspect of production 
would be thoroughly mechanized, with 
vehicles assembled from start to 
finish by machines. And every single 
slow, error-prone, and sometimes 
antagonistic human worker could be 
jettisoned, saving millions of dollars in 
labor costs per year. Once the factory 
had attained this lofty peak of 
efficiency, the last symbolic concession 
to the human—light to work by—could 
finally be removed. In this dark and 
cavernous space, machines would work 
silently and incessantly to churn out 
perfect products in record time. The 
company would be saved; shares would 
skyrocket. In fact, GM's dream would 
ultimately fail. But if that 
incarnation faltered, the lights-out 

factory remains a compelling dream for 
many in the industry, maintained in 
large part by the promises of always-
improving, always-accelerating 
technology.  
Always Improving, Always Accelerating
 Alongside this history of technical 
innovation is a history of computational 
acceleration that automation discourse 
loves to highlight. Martin Ford devotes 
several pages in his best-selling Rise 
of the Robots to Moore's Law, Gordon 
Moore's 1965 prediction that the 
number of transistors on microchips 
would double every year. Erik 
Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee also 
draw on Moore's Law for a section of 
their popular book, Race against the 
Machine. They compare the law to the 

foundation myth of chess, where its 
inventor asks the king for a modest 
reward of rice for every square on 
the chessboard: one grain on the first 
square, two grains on the second 
square, four grains on the third 
square, and so on.  
The authors of both books exert great 
effort to communicate the power of 
the doubling that results, drawing on 
analogies and illustrations. The 
exponential advancement of processing 
power boggles the mind, but readers 
must be made to understand.  
In fact, already by 1975, Moore had to 
revise his prediction, adjusting it to be 
a doubling every eighteen to twenty-
four months. And the "law" stopped 

holding altogether around 2010, as 
controlling the flow of current became 
increasingly difficult with the 
shrinking size of chips. But these are 
minor quibbles that ignore the crucial 
work that Moore's Law is doing in this 
discourse. In both books, it's apparent 
that something more is at stake than a 
mere doubling of transistors on a chip. 
The acceleration of microchips  is 
linked to the overall advancement of 
technology, the ability to use this 
technology to carry out labor, and the 
result of a steady improvement in 
society. For Martin Ford, it's obvious 
that machines are moving from being 
tools to become workers in their own 
right and that "all this progress is, of 
course, being driven by the relentless 
acceleration in computer technology." 

Here Gordon's modest technical trend 
begins to stand in for something much 
greater. Claims around processor power 
balloon into far grander claims about 
technical power and humanity's ability 
to control machines to carry out work.  
Moore's Law = progress. Every year, 
technology is not just getting faster, 
but also better and more sophisticated. 
Every year, our previous expectations 
are shattered, and the new normal 
gets revised. Given this exponential 
improvement, it is only a matter of 
time before we will witness 
"computers that can accomplish 
previously impossible tasks." Moore's 
Law and broader technology 
development help prop up the 
checkered history of automation. The 

compelling dream of full automation 
gets reenergized based on breathless 
claims about the advancements made by 
newer technologies. It may not have 
worked then, the argument goes, but 
this time will be different. In our 
current incarnation, hopes and dreams 
are pinned on nebulous AI. Artificial 
intelligence, we are told, will change 
everything. Listen to highly 
influential tech leaders like Elon 
Musk, and you'll hear about the 
"alien dreadnought" factory, a 
facility asserting that the future of 
work will be "completely inhuman" by 
design. Watch the promotional videos of 
technology titans like Alibaba and 
Amazon, and you'll be presented with a 
vision of smooth logistical flow devoid 
of human touch. In these visions, vast 

warehouses are populated by swarms of 
machines that ceaselessly create 
products and ship packages in a pixel-
perfect choreography. Work is 
performed.  
No humans required.  
If we believe this tale, the fate of 
the human becomes all too clear. 
Technological developments are 
typically rationalized in the blandly 
technocratic terms of efficiency, cost 
savings, and accuracy, slotting neatly 
into broader industry rhetoric of 
innovation and modernization. And yet 
as scholars like David Noble and Harry 
Braverman have thoroughly 
demonstrated, the history of 
automation is not just technical but 

social in reconfiguring the role of the 
human worker. Implicit in this history is 
a drive to reduce human The Fantasy 
of Full Automation 15 labor: fewer 
employees, less time needed, fewer 
skills required. The end game of this 
dream is uncompromising: the production 
and distribution of goods will 
increasingly take place through 
mechanical or technical means, while 
the human laborer is first sidelined 
and then dispensed with altogether, 
banished from the world of work. 
Efficiency and eviction go hand in hand. 
Unable to match the relentless pace 
and exacting precision of the machine, 
humans will become superfluous, a 
vestige of a former age. For some 
commentators, this freedom from labor 

would be welcome, ushering in a 
flourishing utopiaa postcapitalist 
"world without work," or a form of 
"fully automated luxury communism." 
These visions often draw on a strain of 
leftist and Marxist thought that has 
long considered machinic production to 
be a potential form of liberation, 
freeing workers up to enjoy leisure or 
more principled pursuits. For others, 
the fully automated future is a much 
bleaker prospect, validating a long line 
of warnings over the decades 
concerning "technological 
unemployment," the "displacement of 
men," the dystopia of mechanization,20 
the "automation jobless," and the 
automation crisis. But while the 
automation optimists and the 
technopessimists may differ on the 

implications of this shift, they share 
the same underlying assumption of 
technical takeover.  
Whether embraced as a bright future 
or rejected as a dark dystopia, the 
prognosis is remarkably consistent: full 
automation will fully replace the 
human.  
Non-Trivial Problems
 On the face of it, this historical 
progression seems to imply a clear arc, 
a vector moving smoothly and 
inexorably toward a fully automated 
future where the human laborer is no 
longer needed. But accepting this 
narrative at face value would be a 
mistake.  

Here it pays to attend to a specific 
context such as the warehouse. For 
one, there are technical constraints. 
The identification, packaging, and 
redistribution of goods is a non-trivial 
problem. Certainly advancements in 
fields like machine learning have 
enabled new headway into this domain, 
with an array of research chipping away 
at technical challenges. And yet there 
are still tasks that remain almost 
effortless for humans while being 
highly difficult for machines.  
As early as the '70s, one logistics 
expert for Kodak was criticizing the 
"overautomated warehouse." A new 
automated crane system had been 
installed  and needed to calculate the 
shortest routes for picking up items 

around the warehouse. Yet this 
computation was so complicated that it 
produced long delays, barely offering 
an advantage over a human crane 
operator in terms of speed. The 
warehouse, in fact, had hit up against 
the infamous "traveling salesman" 
problem, a so-called NP-hard problem 
that is computationally difficult. Far 
from disappearing, this problem has 
only been exacerbated in the modern 
warehouse, with its millions of 
products and thousands of orders 
waiting to be fulfilled. In a 2020 paper 
by the Chinese logistics giant Cainiao, 
the engineers lament the "huge 
solution space" presented by this 
problem and devise complicated 
frameworks in an attempt to "reduce 
the computational complexity and meet 

the requirements of time efficiency." 
These are hard problems with no simple 
solutions.  
In the previous section, we saw how 
automation pundits use Moore's Law as 
a kind of proof of steady advancement. 
A trend in transistor density becomes a 
far grander claim of technical mastery 
over time. Every day, in every way, 
technology is getting better. But 
computing power is not everything.  
For proof, we only need to turn to the 
modern field of machine learning, 
where data scientists aim to generate 
analytical models automatically from 
data sets. In some ways, machine 
learning is the poster child for 
processor acceleration: theorized 

seventy years ago, it remained 
relatively abstract and 
underdeveloped until chip 
improvements in the late `90s started 
to render it practical as a technique. In 
the past decade, then, there is no 
doubt that machine learning has 
flourished, leading to new applications. 
Yet despite these gains, there are 
signs that certain abilities will not and 
cannot be achieved by merely ramping 
up the size of models. In the end, the 
"bigger is better" mantra of today's 
billion-node neural networks may yield 
only incremental improvements rather 
than the kind of novel learning that is 
actually desired.  
Indeed, some critics have suggested 
machine learning is reaching its limits, 

that its capabilities have begun to 
plateau and that another "AI Winter" 
is approaching.  
Alongside technical constraints, there 
are financial, material, and 
organizational constraints. The lights-
out vision championed by General 
Motors, as alluded to, was generally 
considered to be a failure. Rather 
than the smoothly routinized process 
that was envisioned, automation caused 
chaos The Fantasy of Full Automation 
17 in the factory. In their book on the 
American auto industry, journalists 
Paul Ingrassia and Paul White lay out 
the litany of problems that resulted. 
The computer-controlled dolly 
wandered off course. Spray-painting 
machines painted each other instead of 

the cars, forcing GM to send cars across 
town to an old Cadillac plant for 
painting. Robots were unable to tell 
cars apart, mistakenly installing Buick 
Riviera bumpers on Cadillac Sevilles. 
And when a robotic welding machine 
crashed into an auto body, the whole 
assembly line ground to a halt. Workers 
would have to stand around while they 
waited for a technician to arrive. Even 
after investing billions in the scheme, 
productivity at some plants actually 
went down, and the Japanese cost 
advantage remained unchanged. The 
"great automation solution" had 
fizzled and flopped.  
The same disappointments have more 
recently plagued the Tesla factory.  

"Excessive automation at Tesla was a 
mistake," admitted Musk in a much 
publicized tweet; "humans are 
underrated." A year earlier, the CEO 
had announced his ambitious plans to 
produce a fully automated factory. 
And yet implementing this vision had 
resulted in serious problems. Robotic 
systems had been unable to adapt to 
the inconsistencies in assembly tasks, 
putting the company far behind its 
production targets. After coming to 
terms with this failure, the strategy 
was rethought and the facility 
reconfigured to integrate human labor 
in a more traditional way. The 
integration of robotics into a production 
or warehousing environment, as even 
optimists like Brynjolfsson and Beane 
admit, has proven to be a complex and 

highly expensive undertaking, with 
many companies instead opting for much 
more modest plug-and-play automation 
they can integrate into existing systems 
and processes.  
Routinizing work is not easy. Machines 
generally require regularity and 
uniformity. But labor, it turns out, is 
highly complex and highly 
differentiated.  
Tasks might require a huge variety of 
hand gestures, or a deep knowledge of 
the domain to make decisions, or the 
ability to improvise and deal with crises
—all areas where machines struggle 
and humans excel. Transforming these 
diverse tasks into a process that is 
repeatable, predictable, and 

therefore machine operable is easier 
said than done. When we think of the 
sheer number of industries spread 
across countless countries, each with 
its own complexities, its own contexts, 
and its own ways of operating, we can 
begin to get a sense of the sheer 
number of site-specific applications 
needed to "solve"  the problem of 
work. Indeed it becomes clear that the 
simple word "work" disguises a 
sprawling terrain of wildly divergent 
environments, processes, and people.  
To see these limits in action, one only 
has to think about less standardized 
forms of work. Personal services, for 
example, is one of the fastest-growing 
job markets today. From animal carers 
to child care workers, fitness 

instructors, and home health aides who 
assist the elderly or chronically ill, 
these jobs are deeply situated. 
Workers generally develop a 
relationship over time with a person or 
animal and draw on this deep knowledge 
to attend to their specific needs. To 
labor in this context might mean 
fetching groceries and filling medical 
prescriptions. It could entail giving a 
bath while avoiding scrubbing bruises. 
Or it might require discussing memories 
from the war, developing a child's 
motor skills, or simply holding a hand. 
As Jason Smith notes, "the types of 
labor processes many automation 
theorists suggest are vulnerable to 
replacement by smart machines in fact 
require an intuitive, embodied, and 
socially mediated form of knowledge or 

skill that even the most advanced 
machine-learning programs cannot 
master." Automating one-on-one care 
is far from trivial.  
From a technical standpoint, then, the 
vast landscape of work is dotted with 
land mines: gotchas and gray areas, 
niche applications and edge-cases.  
The mantra that new technology will 
resolve these issues has been 
repeated until it is no longer believed. 
Trust has been eroded by too many 
empty promises. "Full automation is not 
looking promising at all," stated one 
engineer; "the idea of fully 
eliminating workers hasn't been 
practical in the past 70 years, and 
there have been hundreds of 

prototypes of full automation that 
have never been commercialized." Such 
confessions are all the more powerful 
in that they come from technologists 
rather than sociologists, from industry 
insiders rather than critical outsiders. 
"We have 10% left to go, but it now 
looks at least possible that the last 
10% is 90% of the effort, and that we 
might need something different," 
observed one influential technology 
analyst; the industry is gradually 
realizing that the road map "runs out 
short of the destination." Technical 
advancement, once seen as inevitable, 
has become stalled at key junctures.  
The Fantasy of Full Automation 19 The 
Fantasy of Full Automation

 What can we learn from this lineage of 
disappointments? Aaron Benanav once 
stated that the specter of "full 
automation can appear as both a dream 
and a nightmare." But this history 
suggests that full automation itself 
was always a fantasy, a vision 
decoupled from the complexities and 
contingencies of reality. Across the 
decades, automation reports have been 
dominated by a kind of armchair 
economics. In these sweeping overviews, 
trends were often extrapolated based 
on high-level national or international 
labor statistics over the years. Many 
of these predictions were accepted as 
gospel.  
But these analysts never put on a 
hard hat and ventured onto the 

worksites they were generalizing 
about. There were too many 
assumptions divorced from conditions on 
the ground, too much hand waving and 
hoping based on technical improvements. 
This means that when we search for 
the locus of automation, for that 
imagined point where autonomous 
machines extinguish the human, we come 
up empty-handed. The fabled site does 
not exist. Instead we encounter, again 
and again, the fleshiness of human 
labor. On a warehouse floor in 
Hangzhou, a fleet of automated guided 
vehicles dart back and forth, each 
shuttling a package to a chute and 
dropping it in before returning to grab 
another. The vast facility, run by the 
Alibaba logistics arm Cainiao, seems to be 

empty save for these robots. "Packages 
are moving around freely in the 
warehouse with no people present," 
states the video's description. Clearly 
an example of automation, the promo 
proclaims.  
And yet once we start unpacking this 
scenario, the human reemerges and 
grand claims of autonomy begin to 
crumble. Follow the packages down the 
chute, and you'll find laborers 
collecting them on the floor below. 
These are bundled into paper bags and 
hauled into the back of a truck for 
shipping. Last year, just before the 
biggest shopping day of the year, 
logistics companies in China faced a 
formidable challenge: its couriers 
were not showing up to work.  

In a country where strikes are 
officially illegal under the law, 
companies like YTO Express and Yunda 
Express began reporting "abnormal 
operations." The mostly young male 
drivers were walking off the job, 
protesting unfair wages and harsh work 
conditions. Express deliveries in 
Hunan, Jiangsu, and  Shanghai were 
affected and packages were delayed. 
This kind of improvised "non-strike" 
would hardly have been effective if 
human labor was as superfluous as 
automation discourse makes it out to be. 
Revising the Dream
 In recognition of these limitations, the 
vision of total automation is beginning 
to be revised.  

Companies have not only scaled back 
investments in automation, but more 
fundamentally rethought how this 
transformation should take place. 
"The fully automated or highly 
automated fulfillment center isn't a 
North Star we're trying to hit," 
declared one Amazon spokesperson. 
There is a more open recognition of the 
limitations of automated systems. If 
the earlier vision of full automation 
presumed that machines could carry 
out work faster, better, and more 
efficiently, this amended imaginary 
seems more willing to acknowledge the 
constraints of computational awareness, 
autonomy software, and cyber-physical 
work systems. The literature is marked 
by less hubris and more humility—

although these terms would never 
appear in engineering articles or 
industry media outlets.  
One result of this revision is a new 
turn to the human. Scan academic and 
industry papers, and you'll see terms 
like "human-centric" spike over the 
past few years. Instead of assuming a 
replacement of human labor, these 
papers speak of "symbiosis," discuss 
the "trade-offs between manual and 
automated processes," and probe what 
it might mean to have "shared 
responsibility" for certain tasks. This 
form of automation is premised more 
explicitly on collaboration between 
human and machine. Of course, the 
clear-cut boundaries between the 
anthropological and the technological 

presumed by that statement can 
certainly be contested. But this turn 
proceeds outside such theoretical 
debates, remaining uninterested in 
cyborgian figures39 or the silicon-
flesh hybrids fantasized about in 
transhumanism.  
At the same time, this industry-driven 
vision is highly interested in how bodies 
and systems might practically intersect. 
On an immediate level, there is a drive 
to bring bodies and machines into closer 
proximity, to remove the barriers that 
separate them. Brutally fast yet 
potentially dangerous industrial robots 
have been replaced in some settings by 
so-called collaborative robots.  

These "cobots" often feature in-
built safety mechanisms that sense 
humans The Fantasy of Full 
Automation 21 nearby and soft body 
parts that won't injure workers. In 
the same way, highspeed vehicles in 
warehouses—think here of Amazon's 
well-known floor bots that ferry 
goods—have been rethought or at least 
supplemented. One startup came out of 
stealth mode several years ago to 
announce its "autonomous cart." 
Drawing on the same kinds of sensors as 
self-driving cars, the cart senses 
humans and weaves around them. This 
is a slower but more humanfriendly 
device, designed to slot seamlessly into 
the existing labor practices of 
warehouses and factories. The start-
up has already been snapped up by 

Amazon, and so we can anticipate these 
kinds of devices rolling out into real-
world spaces at scale.  
Alongside these specific examples, 
there is the more fundamental 
question of human-machine integration. 
Looking across industry portals and 
engineering articles, one can witness a 
push to more fully understand the 
touchpoints at play in these 
interactions. Such trade-offs are 
often not immediately apparent. 
Offloading physically demanding work 
to a cobot, for instance, might appear to 
be an obvious benefit. Yet this might 
mean that the natural rhythm of labor 
a worker once enjoyed—periods of 
physical exertion interspersed with 
brief moments of decision making—

becomes lopsided. The worker's role 
now becomes purely cognitive—critical 
choices made at pace to match the 
machine—overloading their abilities or 
ultimately alienating them from the 
outcome. These are complex 
negotiations, then, that technologists 
and industries are still working 
through. The aim is to arrive at an 
optimal interplay so that automated 
labor becomes harmonious.  
And yet there is much ground to make 
up. Automation's long obsession with 
efficiency has meant that it is 
somewhat unequipped to deal with the 
new shift toward meaningful human 
integration. Even those from 
disciplines like logistics and business 
management—well removed from the 

"softer" humanities and social sciences
—have observed that the historical 
sidelining of the human has created a 
gap in knowledge. One supply chain 
expert admitted that the "literature 
is largely centered on design and 
technical factors related to 
performance, at the expense of human 
factors" and that even "the scant 
studies addressing human factors have 
mainly been from an ergonomics and 
safety point of view, neglecting socio-
technical aspects." This literature 
demonstrates how thin the 
understanding of the human within 
automation  has been—a vestigial figure 
who only needs to be kept safe while 
the "real work" of technical 
advancement forges ahead. Who is the 
human in automation? What do workers 

need, what do they want, and what can 
they offer?  Strangely these questions 
have only begun to be asked recently, 
allowing the "human-centric 
warehouse" to be presented as a "new 
paradigm." The new focus on humanly 
integrated automation, then, is a kind 
of doubling back. Earlier efforts at 
automation, moving from early 
industrialism to more advanced 
Taylorism, had a very diminished view 
of the human.  
For some tasks, Taylor openly stated 
his requirements: a worker so "stupid" 
that "he more nearly resembles in his 
mental make-up the ox." For other 
systems designers, the disadvantages 
of "human material" were numerous: 
they were "subject to fatigue, 

obsolescence, disease and even death"; 
they were "frequently stupid, 
unreliable and limited in memory 
capacity." The ideal human was someone 
who carried out the given instructions 
to the letter, hour after hour, at 
pace. In these frameworks, the worker 
was barely more than a mechanism that 
lifted or pushed or swiveled—man was 
a motor function. If a mechanical 
system could consistently and 
accurately replicate these basic 
physical motions, it could effectively 
replace the human.  
Yet if these interventions were 
certainly productive up to a point, 
they failed to recognize (and 
instrumentalize) the full extent of 
cognitive, psychological, and social 

capacities possessed by the human. 
Things were missed in the single-
minded pursuit of totalized automation. 
In the warehouse, for instance, these 
decidedly human skills might include 
the ability to identify an item buried 
underneath other products or to 
improvise on the fly when a product 
cannot be found in the correct 
location.  
In content moderation, to take another 
example, the human ability to 
understand the subtle social and 
cultural context of messages is highly 
valuable. These skills are deceptively 
simple for humans but have proven 
frustratingly difficult to code and 
computerize. In revising the dream of 
full automation, there is a renewed 

recognition that the human was a far 
richer subject than was ever supposed. 
Entangled not Erased
 In Our Robots, Ourselves: Robotics and 
the Myths of Autonomy, technologist 
David Mindell underscores many of 
these same points, pushing back against 
The Fantasy of Full Automation 23 the 
inevitability of full automation. The 
concept of linear progress assumed 
that technology would constantly 
improve and that human presence in 
the labor sphere was fated to fade 
away, shifting from direct involvement 
to a remote or mediated intervention 
before autonomous systems supplanted 
them altogether. According to this 
fable, humans would soon be "out of 
the loop" altogether. But there is no 

evidence to suggest that this is the 
case.  
In fact, counters Mindell, the opposite 
is true: the future suggests a closer 
coupling between technical systems and 
human workers, a deeper intimacy 
between people and their machines. 
"For any apparently autonomous 
system," notes Mindell, "we can always 
find the wrapper of human control 
that makes it useful and returns 
meaningful data." We see instead a 
renewed push to actively integrate 
human labor into automated processes. 
This is not simply a matter of using 
human labor for small tasks unable to 
be automated away, but instead a 
deeper enmeshment of machinic and 
anthropocentric work. Turning once 

more to the warehouse sector provides 
a glimpse of what these developments 
look like in practice.  
One manager of an Amazon fulfillment 
center said they are striving to make it 
"feel seamless between what the 
robot is doing and what the humans are 
doing." Another stated they're able 
to "leverage the things that people 
are good for and leverage the things 
that systems are good for. We see that 
pattern playing out in a lot of 
different applications." What role 
should each play in this new labor 
regime? How might the interplay of 
decisions and gestures best function? 
And what adaptations in automated 
systems are necessary to bring this 
synergy about? These are live 

questions that are being worked out on 
the floors of worksites around the 
world.  
Technical systems and human labor are 
deeply entangled, a relation that 
Louise Amoore highlights in Cloud 
Ethics. While Amoore's case study of 
surgical robots is certainly distinct 
from warehouses, she stresses that 
here too, rather than the 
"evacuation" of the human that was 
forewarned, the surgeons describe an 
"extension" of their self and their 
capabilities as machinic vision and 
devices open up new possibilities for 
seeing and sensing. The interaction 
between these machines and their 
users is collaborative, a deeply 
"reciprocal and iterative relationship" 

where users adapt to technical 
constraints and possibilities, and the 
machine records and learns from the 
user. The movements  of surgeons 
become training data for these systems, 
allowing the machine to "learn" to 
stitch based on thousands of collected 
examples. In this sense, the optimal 
machinic cut offered by the robot 
congeals the labor of thousands of 
surgical teams over several years. "In 
every singular action of an apparently 
autonomous system," Amoore stresses, 
"resides a multiplicity of human and 
algorithmic judgments, assumptions, 
thresholds, and probabilities." These 
insights remind us that even when 
machines appear to be "self-acting," 
they are deeply infused with human 
intelligence and expertise. Data sets 

and programming are dense packages of 
human labor, collected over years and 
crystallized into digital forms.  
This entanglement draws our attention 
to new forms of subjectivity that 
automated technologies introduce. The 
adoption of new technology in the 
workplace is not simply a means of doing 
the same thing faster or better, but 
fundamentally shifts a worker's 
agency, experiences, and expectations.  
Some might see these shifts as 
abhorrent; others might consider them 
exciting or simply necessary.  
I'm less interested here in moral 
condemnation and value judgments and 
more interested in considering this 

technical condition as an imperative 
that confronts the laborer. For 
better or worse, this is the new 
normal that must be accommodated and 
negotiated. Indeed, technically 
mediated labor fundamentally reworks 
such values, reconfiguring the very 
notion of what it means to be a "good 
worker," a "team player" who 
performs effectively and identifies 
positively with her labor. Immersed in 
these conditions, how does the 
individual "invent a self-
understanding that optimizes or 
facilitates their participation in digital 
milieus and speeds"?54 In this context, 
the Amazon warehouse worker—or 
"associate" in the company's parlance—
is the canary in the digital coal mine. 
Linked to a wearable device and a range 

of sensors, her steps, item scan count, 
and even bathroom breaks are tracked 
and used to generate key performance 
indicators. This is a work performance 
that is exhaustively digitized, and so it 
is not enough to do the work; her work 
must be made machine-legible. How is 
work categorized within this software, 
and what tasks are prioritized? Which 
variables are indexed, which ones 
matter, and which ones are shared with 
management? Gradually the worker 
gets a feel for this technically 
mediated work, a tacit grasp for how 
certain activities will be interpreted. 
Over time, workers The Fantasy of 
Full Automation 25 internalize the 
logic of the system and perform their 
activities in a way that is 
algorithmically recognized. To see this 

in crass terms as gaming the system is to 
miss the more subtle subjectivation 
taking place here. This is a mutual 
adaptation, as the worker accommodates 
herself to technical systems and these 
systems "learn" from the worker. Of 
course, these systems do not run 
themselves or always run flawlessly, 
and the next section investigates the 
human labor that props them up.  
Maintenance, Not Magic
 Watch the promotional videos produced 
by automation companies, and you'll be 
presented with a flawless universe. In 
the pixels of this CGI world, systems 
function perfectly and hardware 
remains forever glossy. Here, moth 
and rust do not destroy. Yet in the 
real world, things break. Plastic 

cracks, metal warps, chips overheat. 
Technology needs maintenance, not 
magic. To labor in this space might mean 
monitoring systems, diagnosing problems, 
swapping out parts or code, installing 
new components and adapting them to a 
specific context or application. This is 
not sexy work. For server techs, for 
instance, a "truck roll" might mean 
driving to a data center in an industrial 
park at midnight, parking, dragging a 
keyboard and mouse over to a server, 
identifying the problem, replacing a 
dead hard drive, and restarting, 
before heading back home. These are 
the unglamorous jobs, the roles never 
featured in starry-eyed tech 
reportage focused on founders and 
innovators.  

In automation discourse, this type of 
support work is a kind of open secret, 
ever present but rarely discussed. 
One newspaper article, for instance, 
featured the headline: "The Rush to 
Deploy Robots in China amid the 
Coronavirus Outbreak." It spoke of 
staff shortages and "machine-
dominated" assembly lines and seemed 
to suggest that full automation was 
just around the corner. Yet the image 
captions in the same article tell a more 
nuanced story of human involvement at 
every stage of this deployment. "A 
worker debugs a robot at a Sany Heavy 
Industry plant in Changsha" stated 
one. "Technicians adjust disinfection 
robots in a technological company in 
Qingdao" explained another. In these 
photographs, engineers stand around 

machines, often in pairs or groups, 
inputting instructions, tweaking 
movement, and grappling with problems. 
This is automation at the coal face, 
where theoretical  assumptions must be 
adjusted for real-world conditions. 
Humans step in to adapt tech to local 
conditions, to provide course correction
—or to rip off the panels and unjam an 
actuator when things go really awry.  
Human labor also emerges when we peel 
back claims around "smart" or "real-
time" warehouses. At Cainiao, the 
applications that support this array of 
functionality run in server containers, 
requiring intensive computing power.  
In a three-part series, engineers 
outline the work they have done to 

optimize these processes, employing an 
"elastic scheduling system," gathering 
metrics on existing use, establishing 
policies for allocating tasks, and 
building in tolerance for glitches. 
After deploying their changes, they 
monitor the impacts, correct for any 
mistakes, optimize if possible, and 
deploy again. Another post from the 
Cainiao CTO applauds how technical 
teams willingly gave up their holidays, 
"pulled all nighters" and "buried 
themselves in a lot more workload than 
usual" in response to pressures on 
technical systems during the pandemic. 
While these details are highly 
technical, the point here is that the 
engineering team needed to carry out 
an enormous amount of meticulous work 
to sustain these systems. The 

performativity of the smart warehouse 
does not simply happen, but rather was 
constructed piece-by-piece through 
human labor and is constantly 
dependent on it for ongoing operations.  
The same trends apply when we look to 
competitors like Amazon. On the Amazon 
Jobs website, there are currently over 
7,000 postings with the title 
"Automation Engineer." These 
positions range from Austin, Texas, to 
Newcastle in the U.K. and Hyderabad in 
India, leading to the inescapable 
conclusion that each fulfillment 
center requires a team of these 
engineers.  
According to one job posting, an engineer 
must "fully define performance on 

equipment, material and services," 
must be responsible for "incident 
followup, root cause analysis and 
documentation," must "support 
commissioning of new automation 
elements," and must "ensure 
procedural adherence to industry 
operating standards," along with a 
dozen other key tasks. This work is 
highly skilled and highly paid. Crowd-
sourced salary websites indicate that 
each of these engineers can expect to 
earn over $100,000 US per year.  
Who trained these engineers, and what 
tools make their work possible?  When 
we begin to map out the dependencies 
of human labor, it becomes clear that 
these engineers are only the tip of 
the iceberg. An engineer's expertise 

The Fantasy of Full Automation 27 has 
to be built up over years, with her 
training drawing on the education 
sector and its extensive population of 
teachers, lecturers, assistants, and 
professional staff. And an engineer's 
contributions depend on the hardware 
and software sector—the chipmakers, 
developers, coders, and server 
technicians who build these systems 
and keep them running. "Even the 
most ingenious and accomplished 
automaton is far from allowing our 
hands to rest, much less replacing 
them," presciently noted F. G. Jünger 
more than seventy years ago, "for it is 
not a separate mechanism working by 
itself, but a part of a vast technical 
apparatus whose constant development 
entails an increase in the amount of 

work." These observations highlight 
the army of labor needed for 
"automated" systems. They debunk 
the fiction of the lights-out factory 
and the human-less future of work 
that was supposed to be inevitable.  
What, then, for the future? The move 
to digitization across various industries, 
coupled with the complex interactions 
of different systems and different 
standards, means that these kinds of 
support workers will be increasingly 
key. Implementation is far from 
perfunctory, and things will keep 
breaking.  
For sci-fi author Kim Stanley Robinson, 
it's clear that this labor of repairing 
and tending will not disappear anytime 

soon. In his book New York 2140, he 
describes the labor-intensive energy 
and transportation systems needed in a 
post-Anthropocene world, stressing 
the persistent role that humans will 
play.  
These systems "provided a lot of 
employment needed to install and 
maintain such big and various 
infrastructures. The idea that human 
labor was going to be rendered 
redundant began to be questioned: 
whose idea had that been anyway?" 
Such statements puncture the 
overinflated myth of full automation 
and reconfirm the centrality of human 
labor for the future. Certainly 
technology brings with it change. There 
is no question that work conditions in 

the twentyfirst century will differ 
from the nineteenth or twentieth. 
And these shifts bring with them 
fundamental questions about the 
future of work. But this future is 
increasingly spoken of in terms of a 
collaboration between human labor and 
machinic processes—integrating rather 
than replacing workers.  
This integration may bring dignity, 
drawing on the worker's expertise and 
generously compensating her. 
Alternatively, this integration may be 
degrading, exploiting the worker and 
suppressing her rights. As this section 
showed, rose-tinted "integration" can 
quickly veer into feeling like 
instrumentalization pure and simple. 
Yet whatever the conditions, this more 

modest but realistic proposal prompts a 
sharper set of inquiries. What kinds of 
values and assumptions are embedded 
within these systems? Where exactly 
are the hand-off points in this mixed 
machinic-human labor? And what 
happens to oversight and ethics when 
automated decision making is employed? 
Here, retaining the fantasy of human-
less labor in the face of reality 
becomes dangerous, obscuring the real 
issues occurring on the ground and the 
critical research needed to work 
through them. The next chapter 
delves into these new entanglements, 
a "future of work" in the present 
that is both strange and brutal. " IT 
ALL STARTED SOME YEARS AGO , " 
begins the narrator. "My hopes for a 
future in which machines would do all 

the work hadn't come true," he 
recounts. "Instead, I was working for a 
pizza delivery company." The voice 
describes how he masqueraded as a pizza 
bot, guiding customers through ordering 
and notifying them about their upcoming 
deliveries. In this story, a customer 
starts spamming the "bot" for fun, 
texting through puns and odes of 
affection. "We're sorry, we didn't 
understand—please confirm or 
decline," the narrator responds. But 
the customer refuses the instruction 
and continues his harassment. Finally, 
the narrator can't take it anymore. 
"Dude our automated system isn't set 
up yet," he blurts out, "This is a real 
person texting you. I make minimum 
wage. Please just tell me if you want 
the pizza!" While this tale is fictional, 

taken from a work by media artist 
Sebastian Schmieg, it feels believable. 
Schmieg perfectly captures the deep 
entanglements between humans and 
machines that have come to define 
much of contemporary work. Automation 
promised to liberate us from labor, a 
future in which machines "would do all 
the work." Instead we are faced with 
systems that are semiautomated and 
devices that need augmentation. This is 
actually existing automation, a far 
more fragmented future of work that 
can rapidly shift from the promising to 
the pathological. Human labor is 
chopped up, split up, and farmed out, 
but never replaced. Humans are 
working harder than ever. Spotty 
Automation and Less-Than-Human 
Workers

 What does this work look and feel 
like? This chapter explores some of 
the new forms of labor introduced by 
"automated" systems. It zooms into 
workers operating at the coal face of 
automation, moving from digital 
piecework to machine minders and 
content moderation. These technologies 
shape work, allowing companies to 
offshore labor, lower wages, and 
restrict rights—in
 short, to more strongly dictate the 
conditions of labor. And these 
technologies shape workers, steering 
their practices and exerting intense 
social, cognitive, and psychological 
pressures on them. If automation is a 
myth, the necessity of propping it up 
nevertheless influences labor in 
profound and often brutal ways.  

An Invisible Underclass
 While the previous chapter touched on 
high-paid engineering work, automation 
introduces a spectrum of work, with a 
significant proportion being low-paid, 
monotonous, precarious—or all of the 
above. Work in this vein might include 
hand-labeling thousands of images for 
a data set that will be used for 
machine learning. It may involve 
moderating the unending stream of 
toxic comments appearing on a platform 
or flagging hundreds of videos with 
hate speech, animal cruelty, or illicit 
pornography. Or it could mean designing 
countless variations of an online 
banner, each with a slightly different 
message to enable microtargeting. This 
work is crucial. The smooth functioning 

of technical systems depends heavily 
on this kind of labor. And yet for 
political and financial reasons, 
technology companies often strive to 
maintain the illusion of autonomy. The 
"algorithm" makes those decisions; 
that's just how the "platform" 
works. Human labor is whisked behind 
the technical curtain, going on 
unnoticed in the background. Scholars 
Mary Gray and Siddharth Suri describe 
this hidden labor as "ghost work." In 
automation discourse, these jobs are 
often framed as a temporary state of 
affairs. Machines will soon oust their 
fleshy counterparts, we are told, but 
the technology isn't there yet.  
Homo sapiens is still needed for now, 
for those handful of tasks that 

haven't yet been totally routinized. 
In this framing, humans are temporary 
gap fillers that will quickly disappear 
when full automation arrives. And yet 
when we look to the real world, we 
see companies scrambling to deploy an 
ever-expanding range of technologies 
into new Spotty Automation and Less-
Than-Human Workers 31 niches and new 
markets. Because there is no artificial 
general intelligence, each new context 
presents a slew of new problems and 
requires a specific solution. A 
technique to automate agriculture 
cannot be used in logistics. A model to 
read signs in one language will fail to 
read signs in others. A process that 
works flawlessly in the developing 
world breaks in the developed world.  

Each new issue means that the goal 
line of the soon-to-be-automated 
keeps getting pushed back. There are 
always new applications, new industries, 
and new contexts where computational 
methods are undeveloped and humans 
are needed. And even when a technical 
solution has finally been designed and 
deployed, the victory can only be 
described as partial. There are errors 
and oversights, features that need 
propping up with manual interventions.  
Together, these hurdles present what 
Gray and Suri term the "paradox of 
automation's last mile." The grand 
dream of full automation will always 
remain unfinished.  

In this context, humans become stopgap 
solutions, the "artificial artificial 
intelligence" needed for now. 
Technology companies often crowd-
source this work, breaking up the labor 
into thousands of microtasks that may 
take a few seconds or a few minutes to 
carry out. These tasks are farmed out 
via a burgeoning array of crowd-
sourced marketplaces, ranging from 
Amazon's well-known Mechanical Turk 
platform to more obscure players like 
CloudFactory, Playment, TaskCN, and 
Clickworker. Each task is simple for a 
human but difficult for computers. Is 
that object in the image a pedestrian or 
a power pole? Is that word a racist slur 
or harmless internet slang? Does that 
product belong in the kitchen or 
homeware category? Without this work, 

technical systems start to crumble in 
terms of functionality or user 
experience. Search features become 
useless; data sets are too messy or 
noisy to be valid training sources, news 
feeds fill up with spam or toxic 
comments. This is why AI and 
autonomous systems must "return to 
humans to backfill decision-making with 
their broad knowledge of the world." 
This work is low paid, with many 
microtasks yielding only a few cents.  
Workers generate a nominal wage by 
stringing together hundreds or even 
thousands of tasks per day. This 
situation has some appeal for those 
living in remote areas, who would 
otherwise struggle to find full-time 
employment.  

Its flexibility is also a draw card for 
those who need to juggle other part-
time work or are caring for children. 
"As a woman, I prefer to work from 
home," stated one worker from 
Bangladesh. "I earn better than 
others. I have a child.  
I can maintain my family instead of doing 
a regular job." And the ability for 
those in developing countries with a 
lower cost of living to tap into an 
additional income stream has proved to 
be compelling. Experts estimate there 
are now millions of active 
crowdworkers worldwide, and that 
number is only expected to grow larger 
in the future.  

Yet there is no question that this work 
is highly precarious. Scholars have 
challenged the claim that this work 
generates economic benefits, describing 
crowdworkers as a new "mobile 
underclass." This is exploitative work, 
with little to no labor rights, 
conducted under intense time 
pressure. In this sense, this model is a 
form of "digital piecework," 
resurrecting the extractive and highly 
gendered home-based work, 
particularly in the garment industry, 
that labor activists worked for decades 
to abolish.  
Hidden away at home, on anonymous 
platforms, with no recourse when it 
comes to inequality or abuse, this new 
underclass largely goes unnoticed. The 

workers are still there but are 
intentionally concealed, suppressing 
their voices and ability to organize. As 
Veena Dubal stresses, digital piecework 
repeats a certain dynamic that we see 
again and again when it comes to capital 
and technology: "automation does not 
make labor obsolete; it reorders it, 
often rendering it invisible." Shitty 
Automation and Frontline Pressure
 Automation, then, is incomplete. The 
previous chapter demonstrated how 
the dream of full automation never 
arrived. Instead, we are left with 
something partial and piecemeal. 
Workers are expected to join these 
pieces together. As Alexandra 
Mateescu and Madeleine Elish note in 
their study of retail automation, 
businesses "pick up and experiment 

with new technologies, relying on 
humans to smooth out the rough 
edges." Their cognitive, social, and 
physical skills become a kind of bridging 
mechanism, connecting one partially 
automated process with another. People 
paper over the technical cracks. This 
work of sustaining and supporting 
technical systems is vital. Without it, 
"automation" cannot be successful. 
And yet according to the myth of 
automation, these jobs are obsolete, 
these roles on the way out.  
The fiction of full automation must 
tuck these messy human interventions 
Spotty Automation and Less-Than-
Human Workers 33 out of the way. 
Mateescu and Elish observe that the 
"human infrastructure" that 

facilitates these systems is often 
invisible and undervalued.  
Humans prop up technology while being 
overlooked and underpaid.  
Instead of the smooth futurist 
imaginary that was promised, we are 
left with what tech journalist Brian 
Merchant calls "shitty automation." 
Companies and institutions jump at the 
chance to cut costs, assured that these 
technologies will streamline their 
operations and erase their expensive 
labor pool. Yet after the hype of the 
promo video and the sales presentation, 
the actual systems are rolled out and 
intersect with real bodies and real 
spaces.  

Compared to the flawless vision, the 
reality is far messier and more 
mundane.  
Features only half work, parts break, 
and errors emerge. As Merchant 
observes, this is "half-baked 
automation" running on "ill-
functioning machinery" with "garbage 
interfaces" that cause frustration 
for customers.  
Take the self checkout, for instance. 
By combining barcode readers, weight 
sensors, and software interfaces into a 
single machine, automation promised to 
delete that frustratingly expensive 
line item in the budgets of 
supermarkets and retail stores: the 
checkout operator herself. Leaping at 

this cost-cutting opportunity, companies 
have rolled out self-checkout systems 
across thousands of big box chains and 
grocery retailers. Yet rather than 
being erased, this labor is simply 
redistributed. One chunk is offloaded 
onto the customer herself. Now the 
customer must scan each item, ensure 
it has been correctly registered, and 
place everything one by one in the 
bagging area. While framed as a time-
saving measure or a more convenient 
approach, this is ultimately free labor, 
a fact that doesn't go unnoticed. "I 
personally refuse to use the self 
check out because I don't work at the 
store," stated one customer. "And 
when I go to work, I get paid." Annoyed 
at this extra work, customers kick back 
against the system. Theft at self-

checkouts is rampant. Incredibly, one 
survey suggested that up to a third of 
customers regularly steal when using 
self-checkout systems at 
supermarkets.  
Techniques for exploiting these 
systems are gleefully shared among 
users on online forums. In the "banana 
trick," shoppers purchase expensive 
fruits or vegetables, but then enter a 
PLU number for a far cheaper produce 
item (usually bananas). In the "pay 
trick," customers tap the pay button, 
disabling the weighing sensor on some 
models, and then adding more items into 
their bags. And then of course there 
is the simplest trick of all: bag an item 
without scanning it.  

If customers take on extra labor, so do 
employees. These systems were 
designed to do one narrow task and are 
totally incapable of handling the wider 
sociocultural problems they introduce. 
And so it is left to other humans to 
prevent theft, to help customers, and 
to work through errors and 
breakdowns.  
Workers' roles are now reconfigured. 
Now they become support staff, using 
emotional skills to understand why 
customers are becoming upset or 
aggravated.  
They become IT services, using 
technical skills to diagnose the cause 
of an error message or stoppage. And 
they become security personnel, 

maintaining line-ofsight across the 
machines and trying to spot the array 
of hacks that self-check swindlers 
use. As one sales manager stated, "if 
you're not paying attention and if 
somebody's not scanning an item, 
you're just giving it away, you know?" 
All of these microroles come together 
to change the nature of the job. 
Supermarket employees must be 
sympathetic to customer complaints but 
also vigilant in spotting would-be 
thieves. They must be willing to stand 
on their feet for hours at a time but 
also tech-savvy enough to identify 
glitches and override defaults.  
Far from erasing work, then, 
automation creates new work: new tasks 
and new problems requiring new skills. 

In this context, it is the frontline 
worker who is expected to step up and 
adjust herself and her work to these 
new sociotechnical conditions. It is the 
frontline worker who is placed under 
greater pressure, juggling tasks and 
augmenting so-called smart technology 
with actual cognitive and affective 
intelligence. And so in the end, it is 
the frontline worker, as Mateescu and 
Elish note, who must "absorb the 
frontline risks and consequences of 
cost cutting experiments." Management 
invests massive amounts of trust and 
capital in automated technologies and 
then counts on employees to make it 
work. Harried and harassed, these 
laborers nevertheless press on, 
smoothing out the hurdles and humps 
of automation. In doing so, they turn a 

mishmash of sensors and systems into 
something cohesive—an integrated 
experience for consumers and a value-
added product for their companies.  
Machine Minding
 Augmenting or hand-holding 
"automated" systems is not a new 
phenomenon. While the myth of 
automation promised that machines will 
soon improve and iron out all the 
glitches, the reality has always 
differed. Even as early as 1980, 
articles were mentioning the rise of 
"spotty automation," Spotty Automation 
and Less-Than-Human Workers 35 
where machines had half-taken over 
the factory, carrying out the 
interesting tasks while leaving humans 
with menial ones. The result was a 

"corps of bored, dissatisfied people 
who do nothing more than act as machine 
minders." That article, like so many 
others, suggested this was a temporary 
hurdle. Once companies embraced full 
automation, they assured readers, this 
awkward spottiness and the lowly roles 
it created would quickly vanish.  
Workers would soon be liberated to 
take up knowledge-based work, those 
high-skill, high-value positions like 
designer or engineer.  
Yet rather than disappearing, machine-
minding roles have persisted.  
"We're machine babysitters," state a 
trio of workers in Krish Raghav's 
graphic novel about these new labor 

forms in China. "I take the queue 
numbers out from a printer and hand 
them over to guests," states one. "I 
jab a 'self-service' touchscreen on 
people's behalf," chimes in another. 
Why do they carry out such seemingly 
mundane tasks? "Our companies bought 
big shiny machines to 'improve service 
efficiency,'" explains one worker, 
"but they don't trust people to 
actually use them properly." These 
workers understand the hiccups and 
eccentricities of each machine. By 
navigating through menus, stocking 
them with paper, or even just turning 
them off and on again, they keep them 
operational and functional.  
While Raghav's novel is fiction, it is 
based on his astute observations of new 

labor forms in contemporary China. And 
these machine-minding positions do crop 
up in real-world contexts across the 
globe. In England, one chilled-foods 
firm advertised for a "machine 
minder" at their facility. The minder 
would "take control of an automated 
line which moves the cooked product 
from the cooking vessel to different 
types of packaging, for example pots or 
pouches" and would be trained on how 
to carry out "basic machine 
maintenance." In New Zealand, an 
agricultural company advertised for a 
machine minder who could "ensure the 
smooth operation of our automated 
packing equipment." The successful 
applicant would need to operate the 
machinery as well as "troubleshoot and 
resolve machine stoppage issues," 

"escalate problems as needed," and 
"monitor and replace consumables in 
the packaging, tubing, and lidding 
machinery." These roles arise because 
automation is incomplete. Placed under 
the pressure cooker of the market, 
companies have aimed to "modernize." 
The imperative is to move away from 
manual methods and toward routinized 
processes, to shift from hand-
operated labor to standardized and 
mechanized production. Yet what often 
emerges is something much more mixed 
or motley, a worksite stranded midway 
between the fully automated and the 
non-automated. Processes require 
manual intervention to make decisions, 
deal with variability, carry out complex 
gestures, or even just to keep things 
moving smoothly. These workers, then, 

operate at the fuzzy nexus of partial 
automation. They are the human 
augmentation for machines thatare-
not-quite-there-yet, bridging the gap 
between the breathless vision and the 
sometimes-broken reality.  
Of course, this is not to claim that 
these are desirable positions. Spotty 
automation, as the `80s article 
suggested, often creates menial jobs, 
lowstatus roles that are rewarded 
only with low pay and few benefits. 
But this insight in itself is worth 
paying attention to, not least as a 
future flash point for labor 
relations. These jobs undermine the 
myth that automation replaces humans, 
a possibility variously framed as a 

labor-free heaven or an unemployed 
hell.  
Instead of these binary oppositions, 
we've arrived at something closer to a 
labor purgatory. Ours is a moment when 
machines work sometimes but not all 
the time, when some production but not 
all production is mechanized, when some 
use cases are supported but others 
must be manually assisted. Some things 
are automated, but many are not. For 
all the rest, automated technology 
must be supplemented and assisted, 
coaxed along by that most flexible and 
ingenious technology: the human body.  
Backend Work, Hidden Trauma
 If humans mind machines and step in 
for "automation" at brick-and-mortar 

stores, they also augment automation in 
more remote capacities. Here we turn 
to content moderation. Networked 
technologies have enabled anyone with 
an internet connection to post pictures, 
videos, audio, or articles online. These 
in turn can be viewed by almost anyone 
depending on their location and 
internet access. Content is the 
lifeblood of social media in particular. 
Without content, feeds grow stale, 
user bases dwindle, and advertisers 
leave for more popular alternatives. 
For this reason, social media offers 
Spotty Automation and Less-Than-
Human Workers 37 tools to create, 
curate, and distribute content and 
offer an eager audience of consumers
—"eyeballs" in the industry parlance.  

And yet not all content is desirable or 
even lawful. Some of this material, 
such as child sexual abuse material, is 
illegal in many jurisdictions. Some of it, 
such as hardcore pornography, violates 
the license agreements or community 
guidelines of specific platforms. And 
some is simply deemed "objectionable" 
due to its language, propagation of 
disinformation, incitements to violence, 
or political viewpoint.  
To filter out unwanted content, tech 
companies deploy a range of 
sophisticated algorithms that aim to 
identify and erase it. But while these 
automated solutions are beneficial to 
some degree, they are also partial. On 
an immediate level, material like 
memes, videos, and screenshots are 

often not easily machine readable. 
Understanding and extracting the 
"content" from a dimly lit scene, a 
busy protest, or a violent 
confrontation is far from trivial. 
Indeed, those who circulate such 
borderline content sometimes skew, 
reverse, or rotate imagery precisely to 
exploit these limitations. On a more 
fundamental level, the thin line 
between acceptable and unacceptable 
requires an understanding of context-
specific norms and intentions. Navigating 
this highly ambiguous terrain, then, is 
still the remit of humans. "These 
platforms now function at a scale and 
under a set of expectations that 
increasingly demands automation," 
notes Tarleton Gillespie, but these 
"are precisely the kinds of decisions 

that should not be automated, and 
perhaps cannot be." Is that image of a 
woman pornographic or meant to 
demonstrate breast feeding? Is that 
video from the Amazon a form of 
ancestral ritual, or does it veer into 
animal cruelty? These cases gesture to 
the layers of meaning that must be 
taken into account when deciding 
whether to keep or delete any piece 
of content.  
Automated technologies fail, and 
humans must once again step in. Indeed, 
for content moderation providers, the 
known limitations of existing technical 
"solutions" are a clear selling point. In 
her book Behind the Screen, Sarah 
Roberts notes how some companies pride 
themselves on their manual approach, 

working it into their pitch. "We do 
human-content moderation," stated 
one firm; "we don't use robots, we 
don't use filters, we don't try to 
automate this process, we have human 
power, which, you know, it leads to a 
great deal of accuracy versus filters 
and tools." The argument is simple but 
powerful: algorithms and automatic 
processes miss far too much. Vetting 
must be done by hand. Each piece of 
content, they promise, will pass before 
a human pair of eyes and be reflected 
on by a human brain.  
It's ironic, notes Robert, that instead 
of what was promised—"just wait until 
computers can do this better, that will 
unburden the human moderators"—we 
have the opposite: more people.  

In practice, this means an individual 
combing through articles, watching hour 
after hour of video, and inspecting 
thousands of posts. For their work 
Dark Content, artist duo Eva and 
Franco Mattes delved into this hidden 
labor, carrying out one hundred 
interviews with former content 
moderators. Their stories provide a 
snapshot of the toxic fallout endured 
by those who undertake this work. One 
moderator described watching some kind 
of religious ceremony in which a young 
child was pierced with white-hot 
stakes and passed out from the pain. 
Another recounted witnessing a girl 
being brutally raped by two teens, with 
a third looking on and recording it all 
on his phone.  

Another said the most disturbing 
content he moderated was someone 
killing and dissecting cats by stabbing or 
electrocuting them, picking the "best 
scenes of the animals in pain or 
struggling," and then editing them 
together to construct a master montage 
of cruelty. "I can remove the 
content," stated one moderator, "but 
this shit is still in my head." After 
one session screening this material, he 
described "balling his eyes out" in his 
gray cubicle, heading to a bar after 
work to get extremely drunk, and then 
crying more at home.  
These stories gesture to the 
psychological and mental damage that 
moderators absorb. These are the haz-

chem workers of the digital world, who 
expose themselves to its radioactive 
waste day after day, week after week. 
The real issue "isn't the impact of 
individual images," stated one 
moderator who was contracted for 
Accenture for two years; "it's the 
accretion of thousands over time." 
Exposure to this material takes a deep 
toll on the bodies and minds of 
moderators. While there are not yet 
long-term studies on this damage, 
research from other frontline roles 
like child protection25 and law 
enforcement26 demonstrates that 
workers experience high levels of 
stress, burnout, anxiety, and suicidal 
tendencies. Anecdotal evidence from 
content moderators sketches some of 
the same detrimental effects. 

Workers report feeling isolated and 
depressed, sometimes to the point of 
having suicidal thoughts.  
Spotty Automation and Less-Than-
Human Workers 39 One moderator, 
Selena Scola, claimed she developed 
posttraumatic stress disorder after 
nine months of viewing disturbing and 
graphic imagery on the job. She filed a 
suit against Facebook, which was joined 
by a number of other moderators. In 
2020, the tech giant agreed to pay $52 
million in compensation for mental 
health issues on the job. Some of that 
money will go toward medical fees, with 
diagnosed workers able to access a 
licensed counselor and monthly group 
therapy sessions. The landmark ruling 
provides legal precedent for workers 

and organizations struggling to improve 
labor conditions.  
But the case also serves as a formal 
admission of the traumatic nature of 
this work. From drugs and alcohol to 
gallows humor, workers employ a 
number of coping mechanisms to deal 
with this damage. Yet their stories 
suggest these defenses are never 
enough. A toxic melange of cruelty and 
barbarity seeps into the worker's 
psyche over time, slowly injuring the 
inner life of the individual over 
weeks, months, or even years.  
While Scola's win is commendable, it 
hinged on her being directly employed 
by Facebook. In one sense, then, the 
ruling only heightens the liabilities of 

"touching" any part of this labor 
process. Most moderators, in fact, work 
for third-party contractors. They may 
carry out work for high-profile tech 
titans such as Facebook, Microsoft, or 
Google, but they are officially 
employed by contract firms with names 
like TaskUs, UpWork, and Conectys.  
While these firms are headquartered 
in the US or the UK, much of the 
actual labor takes place in Global South 
countries such as India or the 
Philippines.  
And even when moderators work in-
house, they are given different 
colored badges and barred from the 
same kinds of perks and privileges that 
"real employees" are given. No free 

lunches, no use of the recreational 
facilities, and most importantly, no 
included health care.  
There is a kind of intentional 
distancing here, where these workers 
and their work are carefully 
bracketed off. For Roberts, this 
"feature" is a key part of how 
moderation has been set up and 
articulated. Technology companies carry 
out a strategic "series of distancing 
moves" designed to "limit their 
responsibility for any workplace harm." 
Even when the subliminal harms of 
moderating become overt, as in the case 
of suicide ideations or acts, companies 
can claim plausible deniability. It was 
the third party's protocols that 
failed. Their safeguards were 

insufficient. Their workplace practices 
were at fault. After all, moderators 
worked for them, not us. And these 
kinds of distancing tactics, as the next 
section shows, appear again and again 
when we look at automation and new 
forms of labor.  
Extraction at Distance
 Crowdsourcing. Gigging.  
Remoting. Zoom into many new forms of 
work, and you quickly discover that 
what is being automated is not the work 
itself but the delegation of that 
work.  
Networked technologies allow jobs to be 
broken out into tasks, tasks to be 
sliced into microtasks, and those tasks 

distributed to a pool of precarious 
laborers. "The human machine is 
there, pulsating and available," states 
Franco Berardi, and digital networks 
allow these cells of productive time 
"to be mobilized in punctual, casual and 
fragmentary forms." A company's 
physical headquarters may be located in 
Beijing or London, but the firm is able 
to draw on workers living around the 
world, twenty-four hours a day, 
seven days a week. A mother in 
Bangalore wakes at 1:00 a.m. to feed 
her baby and then jumps on to do a 
twenty-minute stint. A student in 
Manila churns through several tasks 
during his lunch break.  
What is truly new about software, 
argued Tessa Morris-Suzuki in a 

remarkably prescient essay written 
almost forty years ago, is that "the 
worker's knowledge may be separated 
from the physical body of the worker 
and may itself become a commodity." 
Traditionally, the site of labor 
struggle has been the warehouse, the 
factory floor, or even the office. In 
this conventional model, workers 
travel to these sites and create value 
by employing their body and mind. 
Equally, they may choose to withdraw 
their laboring body from these sites in 
the case of strikes or walkouts. Yet 
network technologies and platform 
labor alter this long-standing paradigm. 
Laborers and the means of production 
are decoupled. Humans and machines 
are split apart. "We are left with, on 
the one hand, machines which work 

automatically, endlessly responding to 
the instructions provided by workers 
who may be physically far removed 
from the production site," notes 
Morris-Suzuki, "and, on the other, the 
increasing channelling of living labour 
into the process of designing, composing 
and altering those instructions 
themselves." Once remote workers are 
signed up and signed on, their labor can 
be captured in any number Spotty 
Automation and Less-Than-Human 
Workers 41 of ways. That tiny piece of 
intuition can be stored; that small 
gesture can be recorded; that 
emotional reaction can be snapshotted. 
Farmed out and then gathered up, all 
of this labor is funneled back into 
various technical systems, improving 
models and enhancing user experiences. 

Technical systems glom onto the human, 
extracting its useful qualities.  
As my first book argued, the imperative 
here is not to "employ" labor—which 
would require sustaining it with a living 
wage, comprehensive health care, 
employee benefits, and so on—but to 
extract it while retaining legal, 
financial, and geographical distance. 
The aim is to scale up and out, 
expanding operations while insisting on 
the legal and ethical autonomy of 
workers. Given this drive, it is no 
surprise to witness the rise of 
companies like Uber and Airbnb 
premised precisely on this model.  

"Uber, the world's largest taxi 
company, owns no vehicles," proclaimed 
tech pundit Tom Goodwin, "and Airbnb, 
the world's largest accommodation 
provider, owns no real estate." In this 
model, workers are no longer 
employees but freelancers defined by 
neologisms like Uber's "driver-
partner." These workers must manage 
themselves, insure themselves, and 
promote themselves. They must 
constantly adapt their practices to the 
app's algorithmic management, which 
can shift rapidly from one day to the 
next. And they must carry out their 
tasks consistently and professionally, 
with the pressure of bad ratings and 
permanent bans constantly hanging over 
them. For the company, this is a 
flexible labor pool that can stretch 

and flex on demand. Yet just as 
crucially, this is a decoupled labor 
pool, cleanly disconnected from the 
rights that usually come with employee 
status. The company remains asset-
light and agile; the worker takes on 
the heavy externalities and anxieties 
needed to earn a living.  
Automated technologies, then, assist in 
draining labor from afar. They allow 
companies to exhaust the productivities 
of workers without being saddled with 
liabilities. Marx was astute in 
recognizing that this extractive 
relationship was at the core of the 
value relation. "Capital is dead labour, 
that, vampire-like, only lives by 
sucking living labour, and lives the 
more, the more labour it sucks," he 

famously observed. Similarly, Luciana 
Parisi has described this as a "human-
machine mode of parasitism." 
Crowdsourced or platform-mediated 
labor, particularly in our post pandemic 
period, aims to extend this parasitic 
mode to more workers in more remote 
locations.  
Rather than replacing the human, 
Parisi points out, such crowdsourcing 
platforms facilitate "less-than-
human" labor, exploiting workers to 
carry out machine-like service. How is 
labor made "less-than-human"?  
Through that most ancient of 
technologies—that difference-making 
device we refer to as race and gender. 
The lack of an appropriate algorithm, 
observes Parisi, means that high data 

tasks must draw on a "racialized and 
gendered pool of global temporary 
workers." Following the logic of 
capital, the aim is to keep identifying 
ever more precarious labor pools in 
order to keep pushing labor costs 
lower. According to this brutal 
calculus, the remuneration and 
conditions should be reduced until 
they reach an absolute baseline beyond 
which people will not engage in work. 
And who sets this baseline? By 
operating a global marketplace, this 
baseline is established by the most 
marginalized individuals who can 
somehow gain access to a computer or 
mobile device and an internet 
connection. A number of crowdworking 
platforms operate "Cheapest Offer" 
auctions, where workers compete 

against each other to offer the lowest 
possible price. Scholars have shown how 
this logic creates "wage dumping," 
plunging the price downward to the 
point where only the workers with the 
lowest cost of living can generate 
income.  
Like a homing beacon, then, these 
platforms are hunting for surplus 
populations composed of the 
unemployed or underemployed. And 
these populations are invariably people 
of color, or women, or those in the 
Global South. As Niels van Doorn 
observes, "the majority of cleaners, 
janitors, and home care providers 
operating in the gig economy are 
working-class men and women of color." 
Yet the real "triumph" of digital 

platforms is to use the labor conditions 
for the surplus population as the 
template for the whole population. 
Their "innovation" is to make work, 
regardless of who carries it out, 
racialized and gendered. There are 
certainly white men operating on these 
platforms, driving cars, running 
errands, or completing microtasks while 
referring to this labor as their "side 
hustle." However, as van Doorn 
stresses, "they are unable to fully 
detach from the gendered and 
racialized order of worth that haunts 
this kind of service work and continues 
to associate it with a lack of value, 
skill, and dignity." As the conditions 
and paycheck quickly reveal, they are 
laboring in roles that have leveraged 

racialized and gendered stereotypes to 
render this work low status.  
Spotty Automation and Less-Than-
Human Workers 43 All the Work 
without the Workers
 Alex Rivera's Sleep Dealer 
anticipated this future of labor. The 
science fiction film is set in a near-
future scenario in which a massive wall 
permanently separates the United 
States from Mexico. Rather than 
crossing physically into the country, 
Mexican emigrants work from digital 
factories. By hooking their bodies up to 
these networks, they "plugin to the 
new American dream," remotely 
puppeteering robots that carry out 
labor in the States. These robotic 
proxies perform a broad range of work, 

from building skyscrapers in Chicago to 
picking oranges in Florida and packing 
meat in Iowa.  
The grand dream of "automating" the 
full spectrum of work has finally 
arrived, and yet it comes not through 
some groundbreaking advancement in 
general intelligence, but by a Mexican 
performing to the point of exhaustion. 
Released over a decade ago, the film is 
uncanny in its prediction of a number 
of labor trends. Yet for Rivera, this 
vision simply extrapolates from the 
core logics that have always dictated 
labor relations. "Essentially, our 
economy has no moral core or moral 
guard rails on it," he notes, "If you 
know that, and look at new 
technologies, you can quickly arrive at 

the predictions I made." The film 
undermines the myth of automation, 
asserting that these technologies are 
not about erasing work but about 
displacing it. Labor is shifted onto 
women, migrants, people of color—
subjects typically less able to exert 
their rights and make demands. 
Technology's "innovation" is drawing 
on these laboring bodies while keeping 
them far away from influential 
clients, from corporate headquarters, 
and even from other laborers they 
might collectively organize with. 
Companies want to harness these skills 
and abilities while ensuring their 
political agency remains at a safe 
distance. Digital networks allow them 
to push this problematic body far 
enough away so that it, along with any 

claim-making potential, effectively 
disappears. The dream, as Sleep 
Dealer's trailer proclaims, is simple 
but brutal: "All the work, without 
the workers." In the end, this is how 
automation "erases" the human. The 
full human subject—that rich historic 
figure endowed with inalienable rights 
who can draw on a potent spectrum of 
claims—is deleted. Pasted in its place is 
a more shadowy figure who is "less-
than-human" by design. This is the 
global digital worker, who may appear 
only briefly as an avatar or a 
username.  
For this figure, agency has been ring-
fenced, shrunk to an ideal zero point.  

Conditions are locked in place by the 
platform and its set menu of features 
and functions. The pay rate is fixed 
and the choices are few: to work on 
this task, to work on that task—or not 
to work at all. They are "free" to 
provide their labor and free to 
withdraw it. If they provide it, they 
must compete with others across the 
globe for the same tasks, carrying them 
out faster or cheaper. Technology's 
triumph, then, is turning all of these 
laborers into racialized and gendered 
laborers whose working conditions are 
defined by a race to the bottom. The 
global digital worker is a figure whose 
work is so simple that "anyone" can do 
it and whose identity is so generic that 
"anyone" can replace them.  

Full automation, then, never arrived. 
Total autonomy was never achieved. 
Instead we are left with a future of 
work that is half-baked, an array of 
semiautomated systems and processes 
that need augmentation and 
intervention. And yet in one sense, 
the dream to replace the human 
laborer came true. The human worker, 
on full pay, with full hours, and full 
benefits, is becoming harder to find in 
many contemporary labor regimes.  
For companies that have embraced new 
schemes like platform labor, 
crowdworking, and gigging, that person is 
now a relic, a vestige of a former time 
that is unlikely to return. Instead we 
see the rise of a more anonymous and 
precarious laborer, a lower-paid and 

lower-status individual who can be 
drawn on when needed and dispensed 
when necessary. Now, "just-in-time 
production is overseen by a 
permanently temporary labor force." 
Undermining the myth of automation 
and developing a portrait of actually 
existing work points to this figure and 
the conditions she grapples with.  
This insight brings with it a certain 
bleakness. Faced with falling wages, 
reduced rights, and shrinking agency, it 
is easy to slide into fatalism. To be 
sure, suggesting that labor schemes 
revert to the halcyon days of the past 
seems like wishful thinking. And 
certainly to declare that any single 
intervention—from government 
regulation to reeducation schemes—is 

the silver bullet solution for all 
workers everywhere would be 
disingenuous.  
What the response should be is 
unclear. Yet new conditions always 
usher in Spotty Automation and Less-
Than-Human Workers 45 new 
capabilities. Digital technologies unlock 
new forms of organizing and mobilizing. 
Platform mechanisms used for 
exploitation can be co-opted for 
solidarity. And the fact that 
automation is incomplete means that 
human labor is valuable and 
irreplaceable. All of these factors 
should offer hope to those seeking to 
build a more radical and sustainable 
future of work.  

PART 2 The Myth of Automation 
Everywhere
 AUTOMATION IS A MYTH because 
automation is universal. Whether 
described in boosterish business terms 
or predictions of doom, automation is 
framed as a ubiquitous force rippling 
across the globe.  
Best sellers warn that an "automation 
wave" is about to hit the world.  
Business reports echo this 
understanding, describing three 
"waves" that will sweep over society.  
For other pundits, automation is 
better described as an "age," a new 
era that will usher in global change.  

The same all-encompassing rhetoric can 
often be witnessed in discussions of 
automation, which quickly leap into a 
highly abstracted debate employing 
grand terms like "humanity," 
"technology," and "society." 
Together, these terms work to toss 
out the specificities of city and 
country, culture and region. 
Automation, it seems, is a universal 
condition, a de-situated force that 
will soon envelop the planet.  
Take The End of Work, for example, 
Jeremy Rifkin's widely sold book that 
lays out the argument in its title. "We 
are entering a new phase in world 
history," intones Rifkin, "one in which 
fewer and fewer workers will be 
needed to produce the goods and 

services for the global population." 
What will be the cause of this dramatic 
new epoch? "More sophisticated 
software technologies are going to bring 
civilization ever closer to a near-
workerless world," he explains. And 
these technological advancements are 
poised to impact every country and 
every industry. All sectors of the 
economy, warns Rifkin, are now 
Technology in Context, Technology as 
Culture
 "experiencing technological 
displacement, forcing millions onto the 
unemployment rolls." No matter where 
you are or what you do, you will soon 
feel the ubiquitous force of 
automation in the form of wall-to-
wall redundancies.  

Automation, then, is framed as a global 
phenomenon, an overarching force that 
floats above the particularities of this 
culture or that culture, this place or 
that place.  
This is a "world without work," a 
"time of brilliant technologies" that 
will soon envelop us all. Such framings 
flatten a vast constellation of 
distinctions, erasing differences in 
language, history, socioeconomic status, 
labor rights, political regimes, and 
numerous others. The resulting myth 
is powerful but problematic, collapsing 
cultural difference to tell a unified 
tale about the future of technology 
and its impact on labor. Certainly new 
technologies usher in shifts—changes in 
labor conditions that matter deeply 

for workers, employers, governments, 
and society in general. And yet in 
refusing to be pinned down, automation 
loses much of its analytical purchase.  
Where exactly is automation to be 
found? In many popular books, the unit 
of analysis is the world—"where" 
effectively becomes "wherever." The 
result is that the same fate seems to 
await everyone, everywhere. The use 
of the singular betrays this shared 
destiny. In their first book, 
Brynjolfsson and McAfee want to tell 
you how the digital revolution is 
transforming "the economy." In their 
second, they aim to sketch out the 
influence of robotics on "the labor 
market." And in his best seller, Ford 
discusses the jobs and threats of 

unemployment in "the future." But 
as any geographer or ethnographer 
could tell you, there are economies 
plural, markets plural, and futures 
plural.  
This basic fact suggests that technology 
will be adopted differently in 
different places. And these distinct 
approaches and relationships, occurring 
within the local lifeworld of 
individuals and communities, will 
produce a set of highly divergent 
futures.  
Technology in Context, Technology as 
Culture
 So what—and where—are we talking 
about when we talk about automation? 
Dig into these systems and you quickly 

discover their sitedness, their 
grounding in a particular time and 
place. Instead of accepting the 10,000- 
foot view offered by automation 
discourse, it pays to focus on particular 
instances of automation. Zoom in, and 
you might arrive at a warehouse in 
Technology in Context, Technology as 
Culture 51 Hangzhou, for instance. 
Dotted around the floor are a swarm 
of automated guided vehicles, the 
robots that shuttle crates back and 
forth. Pick one of these devices up and 
unscrew the cover, and you'll find a 
processor chip not made by U.S.  
semiconductor giants like Intel or 
Qualcomm but by HiSilicon, a Chinese 
manufacturer. This tiny chip points to 
an important tale.  

Several years ago, the inroads that 
Chinese firms had recently made in the 
fields of machine learning, wireless 
protocols, and particularly in 5G—a key 
critical infrastructure technology for 
the foreseeable future—caused 
unease in Washington.  
While these corporations were 
multinational, the Trump administration 
believed they maintained close ties 
with Beijing and that this undue 
influence would lead to backdoors or 
other surveillance mechanisms being 
embedded into future information 
technologies.  
They responded by blacklisting 
information technology providers like 

Huawei and Xiaomei, along with dozens 
of other Chinese tech firms. U.S. 
companies were prohibited from 
purchasing parts from these companies 
or supplying electronic components to 
them.  
These moves escalated into a 
"technology war" that meant that 
cooperation or even communication 
between Chinese and American tech 
firms was prohibited.  
Chinese companies responded by starting 
to domesticate their supply chain. Of 
course, global dependencies are 
complex; this process will not happen 
overnight or perhaps ever in totality. 
Yet one by one, American components 
have begun to be stripped out and 

alternative Sino suppliers found. 
Technology wars and the regulatory 
red tape that accompany them are not 
going away, forcing international 
alliances to be substituted with 
technology that is designed and 
developed locally.  
These shifts exemplify a turn toward 
nationalized infrastructure. "In 
China," notes Gabriel de Seta, "two 
decades of state-led ICT development 
and a conception of cybersovereignty 
elevated to foreign policy spearhead 
have carved out a geopolitical enclave 
in which computational architectures 
and informational actors are coming 
together into what could be 
deservedly termed the Red Stack." 
This stack is at once political and 

technical, a homegrown assemblage that 
starts at the bare metal of the chip 
and moves all the way up through 
operating systems and wireless 
protocols to the software applications 
at the top. For states, building out the 
stack is a way to wrest back control 
over the digital technologies that 
increasingly shape everyday life, 
developing an end-to-end ecosystem 
with local and national principles at 
their heart. This is "our" tech with 
"our" values.  
The domestication of technology points 
to a basic but fundamental point: 
automation is not a universal state but 
rather a fragmented condition. Looking 
across time and space, we see a 
patchwork of wildly differing 

approaches to simulating intelligence, 
optimizing work processes, and carrying 
out human-like gestures with 
mechanical devices. Some technologies 
were funded by the aristocracy; 
others were commissioned by the 
industry or the military.  
Some devices were designed to attack 
strongholds or wound enemies; others 
were constructed to keep accurate 
time or entertain the court with song 
and dance.  
All of these projects were embedded 
in a distinct cultural setting, from 
upholding certain notions of power and 
prestige to practical aspects like 
funding, design, and fabrication. Far 
from being a single red thread, the 

development and adoption of 
technology is more like a rich tapestry 
composed of powerful patrons, local 
inventors, specific communities, 
language adaptations, regional needs, 
and many other interwoven elements.  
This kaleidoscope of particular people 
and places erodes the universalism of 
the automation myth. For Yuk Hui, we 
need to reject the universal history 
of man and the universal concept of 
technology. "What we lack now," he 
stresses, "is the thinking of a 
technodiversity in the current 
geopolitics." Hui reminds us that 
technology is always deeply situated, 
grounded in a particular place and time. 
Context shapes how these techniques, 

infrastructures, and processes will be 
taken up and implemented.  
Just as there is no singular television 
but rather "this television, our 
television," there is no singular 
technology; technologies are plural and 
local, and they must be understood as a 
"cultural form." Hui makes this same 
point by excavating a distinctly Chinese 
philosophy of technology from 
traditional Daoist and Confucianist 
thought, arguing that there is not a 
single technics but multiple technics.  
Building on these insights, we can 
assert that there is not a single 
"Automation," but rather many 
automations. Each of these versions is 
distinct, varying from place to place. 

Automation in China unfolds 
differently from its Technology in 
Context, Technology as Culture 53 
deployment in the United States. 
Automation in India is following a 
distinct path from its development and 
adoption in Australia.  
This is not to descend to a kind of 
cultural essentialism, where tech gets 
read through broad stereotypes, but 
to simply acknowledge that technology 
and culture are deeply intertwined—so 
entangled, in fact, that it is often 
impossible to distinguish among them. 
These formations emerge from the 
unique interplay of cultural values, 
local expertise, research institutes, 
supplier ecosystems, and state 
intervention in each nation. 

Technology, as Vincent Mosco reminds 
us, is "mutually constituted out of a 
culture that creates meaning and a 
political economy that empowers it." 
Stolen Tech and Shanzhai
 Without this cultural perspective, 
misunderstanding is rife.  
Automation is sometimes discussed in a 
broader debate around AI technologies, 
chip production, and a long-standing 
Sino/American rivalry. Here, Western 
commentators have been acerbic, 
bitterly throwing out accusations of 
"stolen tech." Chinese companies have 
blatantly ripped off their U.S. 
counterparts, they allege, imitating 
hardware designs and software 
implementations.  

Rather than beginning from a blank 
slate and forging their own path, they 
have taken a shortcut, borrowing and 
adapting from others. Blind to their 
own cultural bias, these Western 
pundits assert that creation-from-
scratch is key, that originality is 
everything. In refusing to play by 
these rules, Eastern competitors have 
cheated, committing the mortal sin of 
copying.  
But as Byung-Chul Han asserts, a 
"prior, primordial positing is alien to 
Far Eastern culture." In this context, 
the concept of an original, a unique 
object without precedent, is out of 
place. His book Shanzhai explores the 
Chinese cultural trope of the same 
name, a term that literally means 

"mountain fortress" but now refers 
to counterfeits or knockoffs, 
particularly in the electronics sector. 
Han goes beyond these Western slurs 
to excavate the history of this 
concept, tracing the fundamentally 
different way that imitation has been 
viewed within that culture. Here, 
replication is a sign of success, with the 
most desired objects being copied the 
most. And here, reproduction is a kind 
of homage, with each successive variant 
paying respect to earlier traits while 
also striving to improve upon it.  
In the West, "shanzhai" has gradually 
moved from a term of derision to a 
concept that draws begrudging praise. 
Shanzhai's approach of creating 
countless product variants for 

underserved niches has led to some 
wildly creative designs, from phones 
with built-in Buddha shrines and 
cigarette holders to watches with 
horoscope maps. For those in technology 
sectors and business schools, shanzhai 
injects something new and enticing into 
tired capitalist enterprise, 
constructing a novel innovation 
ecosystem that clearly feeds into 
long-tail market demand while 
retaining a number of uniquely Chinese 
characteristics. And yet, as Silvia 
Lindtner, Anna Greenspan, and David Li 
note, shanzhai is "neither 
straightforward counterculture nor 
pro-system." It is certainly 
entrepreneurial, focusing closely on 
market dynamics—but often plays on 
the margins of those markets.  

It is hard-headed and profit aware—
but its designs can also be seen as social 
projects in recognizing religious 
devotees, the elderly, and other 
communities typically overlooked by 
global brands. These qualities create a 
unique form of cultural production 
that is "critical enough to resist 
assimilation yet constructive enough to 
have a sustainable impact." Shanzhai 
thus walks a kind of tightrope, 
maintaining a delicate balance that 
acknowledges the power of market 
forces while stubbornly holding onto a 
degree of creative independence. When 
it comes to automation, then, we should 
expect that shanzhai culture would 
retain this ambivalence, feeding into 
local technical initiatives but also 

tweaking them, twisting them, or even 
working against their worst excesses. In 
their fieldwork from Chinese maker 
spaces, Xin Gu and Pip Shea observed 
that local communities resisted a 
"universal maker culture" and saw 
"Shanzhai 2point0 as more appropriate 
in addressing local problems such as 
automation and gentrification." In this 
sense, shanzhai is both the automated 
assembly line and the home-grown 
phone or hacked-together wearable 
that helps workers cope with the 
pressures of production.  
Shanzhai, then, sheds light on local 
approaches to technology while 
refusing to ever be pinned down 
entirely. This disclaimer can be applied 
to cultural insights in general. Along 

with differences among cultures, 
there are also major differences 
within cultures.  
While companies like Alibaba and Didi 
Chuxing emerge from China, it's clear 
they adopt a range of different 
philosophies. Some founders embrace 
Confucian principles such as 
"harmonious while different" to guide 
their decisions; others cherry-pick a 
mix Technology in Context, Technology 
as Culture 55 of practical strategies 
drawn from the East and West. Yet at 
the very least, bringing the cultural 
context into this conversation can 
provide a deeper understanding of a 
firm's strategies and motivations: 
where they choose to concentrate 
resources, how their research is 

carried out, the path that their 
product development takes, and so on. 
Decisions around automation and 
technology more broadly are not 
purely utilitarian but are shaped by 
the culture they are embedded within. 
Ethics and (Dis)trust
 Folding in the cultural dimension may 
also provide insights when it comes to 
the ethics of technology. The rise of 
automation and AI has seen a cottage 
industry emerge around these topics in 
the West. A wide array of institutions, 
task forces, and organizations have 
sprung up, each offering its own moral 
doctrine for this brave new world. 
From the "pillars of ethical 
automation," to a four-stage model for 
"socially responsible automation" and 

the "ethical automation toolkit," a 
dizzying number of frameworks, 
guidelines, and principles are on offer. 
Yet as Han argues, "Chinese thought 
distrusts fixed, invariable essences or 
principles." For Han, the Chinese 
character quan embodies this fluid 
approach to thought, denoting a kind of 
weight that can slide back and forth on 
a scale. "Quan describes the potential 
inherent in a situation rather than a 
set of rules that remains the same, 
independent of conditions and 
situation," he explains. "In the 
context of quan, nothing is final." This 
more fluid conception of ethics is 
reminiscent of machine learning, 
providing a set of parameters or nodes 
that can be tweaked to reach a desired 
outcome. Rather than a rigid moral 

code, quan is more like a dial that can 
be ramped up and down. Of course, it 
would be too simplistic to say that quan 
or any one trope feeds directly into a 
definitive Sino technical ethics. These 
concepts instead constitute a kind of 
cultural grammar that institutes and 
actors can draw on when creating 
ethical frameworks for emerging 
technologies. Both China's Ministry of 
Science and Technology and the Beijing 
Academy of Artificial Intelligence have 
published their own sets of principles 
in recent years. These guidelines, 
together with specific examples of 
technology in the field, start to mark 
out a distinctly Chinese approach to 
digital ethics.  

While Western frameworks tend to 
focus heavily on the rights of 
individuals, scholars anticipate this 
ethical approach will emphasize social 
responsibility and group relations.  
It's clear that culture also shapes 
the adoption of automated technologies 
for end users. Over the past two 
decades, a string of studies have 
investigated why certain cultures tend 
to trust automation more than others.  
One study compared how users from 
the United States, Taiwan, and Turkey 
interacted with an automated path 
planner.  
The scholars were interested in 
whether the "cultural logics" model 

might explain how these technologies 
are approached. This widely used model 
defines three cultural types: Dignity, 
Face, and Honor. In Dignity cultures, 
prevalent in Western Europe and 
North America, self-worth is derived 
internally. In Face cultures, 
characteristic of East Asian societies, 
self-worth is derived externally 
from a stable social hierarchy and 
fulfilling role obligations. And in 
Honor cultures, associated with the 
Middle East, Latin America, and the 
Mediterranean, self-worth is linked 
to honor, which must be claimed as well 
as paid to others.  
As the researchers predicted, 
cultural background deeply shaped the 
way that the same technology was 

treated by each group. The Turkish 
group displayed the "slow-trust" 
characteristic of Honor cultures, with 
this distrust ultimately leading to 
disuse of the technology altogether. 
The Taiwanese group, in contrast, 
tended to display automation bias, 
relying on its decisions "even under 
conditions of reduced trust." Based on 
these distinct responses, the 
researchers recommended that 
multiple interfaces be developed, 
surfacing more information for some 
cultures and giving others more 
control. Granted, any typology is prone 
to generalizations. Cultures are 
certainly not monolithic, and 
individuals vary in their embrace of 
traditional cultural characteristics. 
But these insights add in a much 

needed cultural dimension to the 
universal framing of automation that is 
typically put forth.  
Rather than a bland globalism, they 
provide taste and color, a specificity 
that is sorely lacking from most 
analyses.  
Automation or Consolidation?  One 
benefit of a more situated approach to 
automation is that it provides 
conceptual clarity. Rather than 
ascribing an outcome merely to "the 
technology," a socioculturally attuned 
view highlights the local dynamics at 
work.  
Technology in Context, Technology as 
Culture 57 A tech company in 

Shenzhen, for instance—a location 
known for its vast hardware ecosystem 
and shanzhai-inspired approach—may 
take a completely different approach 
when it comes to technical 
development. There is a sense of 
"thinking-from-within" here, of the 
researcher, policymaker, or 
technologist placing themselves in 
another company or organization's 
shoes.  
From this perspective, a whole new set 
of forces comes into view: the history 
and norms of an industry, 
governments' laws and incentives, 
regional strengths and weaknesses. Of 
course, that doesn't mean technical 
aspects are irrelevant. Information 
infrastructures and technical 

functionality clearly feed into any 
discussion around contemporary labor 
regimes. But in some cases, technology 
seems to be the least important part 
of the story.  
Take the origin story of Cainiao, for 
example, the Chinese logistics giant.  
In 2010, the Chinese logistics market 
was fragmented and inefficient. The 
status quo was for companies to 
contract separate firms for logistics, 
storage, and warehousing and turn to 
independent service providers when it 
came to supply chain management. This 
piecemeal approach meant that 
companies might have a dozen firms 
handling different aspects of their 
business. Much of this fragmentation 

was a result of local protectionism. 
"Driven by the desire to maximize local 
economic growth, employment and tax 
revenues, and less by concern about 
the efficient utilization of regional 
resources," local governments had 
lobbied for transport infrastructure 
funds even when they weren't 
necessary. This created duplicate 
logistics parks, a glut of providers, and 
general oversupply. Firms 
proliferated to the point where the 
top twenty logistics companies in China 
controlled only 5point5 percent of the 
market. This chaotic situation was made 
worse by the lack of standards when it 
came to practice and procedures.  
Factions of small companies engaged in 
price wars and depended heavily on 

handwritten bills of lading. This was 
the "logistics dark age." The result 
was predictable: a market "saddled 
with poor service standards, 
ineffective package tracking methods, 
and dismal delivery times." Cainiao 
entered the market in May 2013, aiming 
to rework every segment of the 
product chain to draw on the benefits 
of contemporary technology.  
The concept in essence was relatively 
straightforward: Cainiao would build a 
platform for intelligent logistics and 
handle the data while collaborating 
with leading logistics providers to 
handle the warehouses, vehicles, and 
people.  

The original consortium included 
companies such as Yintai Group, Fosun 
Group, and Forchn alongside delivery 
companies like Yunda and SF Express.  
Yintai's specialty was warehouse 
management; Fosun focused on 
warehouse construction; Forchn was an 
expert in line hauling. This approach 
established an automated end-to-end 
supply chain.  
This story, while itself bordering on 
business creation myth, stresses 
consolidation rather than merely 
"automation." It is not that Cainiao 
simply applied technology to various 
segments of the logistics supply chain, 
but that it was able to integrate them, 
to bring them under a single banner.  

Rather than contracting a dozen 
companies to manage storage and 
shipping, one provider could coordinate 
it all. We can see this consolidation at 
work simply by looking at the logistics 
pieces that Cainiao has assembled: 
machine learning techniques, 
standardized logistics databases, last-
mile delivery, and local collection 
points, among others. Technically, of 
course, many companies are involved in 
this chain, from the small businesses 
making the products to the Tmall 
storefront that sells them and the 
various last-mile contractors that 
deliver them. This is what scholars 
call an "interorganizational network," 
where strong links between companies 
boost their reach and performance far 

beyond what they could accomplish on 
their own. In this sense, Cainiao is much 
closer to an ecosystem model than a 
single corporation such as Amazon.  
Yet whether framed as ecosystem or 
platform, Cainiao's consolidation is 
powerful in establishing certain 
standards and procedures that 
companies must adhere to. For instance, 
Chinese addresses often vary 
significantly, with many different 
formats given. Some place the postal 
code before the province, some after 
it. Older or less modernized styles 
group the district and the city 
together. To combat this variation, 
Cainiao makes databases of standardized 
addresses freely available to a range 
of partners and companies. These 

fourlevel addresses contain 
"standardized and structured 
administrative address information," 
establishing a common way to designate a 
location. This reduces duplicate 
databases that may be incompatible with 
this system and has flow-on effects in 
terms of better dispatching, improved 
path planning, and optimized vehicle 
routing. Standardization, then, is more 
than merely aggregation: this is not 
just about bringing all this information 
together under Technology in Context, 
Technology as Culture 59 one roof. 
For data to be useful, it must be 
compatible. Users must be able to 
cross-index fields and compare values 
against each other. As Ned Rossiter 
reminds us, "logistical technologies 
derive their power to govern as a 

result of standardization across 
industry sectors coupled with 
algorithmic architectures designed to 
orchestrate protocological equivalence 
and thus connection between software 
applications and workplace routines." 
Entities and agents across multiple 
sites must be made consistent so that 
they can be identified, evaluated, and 
optimized.  
By imposing a unified schema across the 
platform, Cainiao establishes a degree 
of interoperability. Processes that 
were seen as distinct can now be 
related; activities in one part of the 
supply chain can now feed usefully 
into another. Yes, Cainiao may have 
beaten other companies in any single 
segment, tracking packages or shipping 

faster. But consolidation stresses the 
new connections that have been forged 
across a local context and a particular 
supply chain. This new cohesion allows 
the links, the intersection points 
between things, the transitions across 
phases to be considered. Here we're 
reminded of Sandro Mezzadra and Brett 
Neilson's focus on the production of 
operations "not as a 'thing' but 
rather a set of links or relations 
between things, which is to say the 
framework or skeleton of a world." 
This insight pushes back against 
automation's mantra of better, 
faster, more efficient. Cainiao's story 
is less about technology "making things 
better" and more about putting people 
and things into tighter relation with 

each other. Processes that were 
disjointed are now interoperable.  
Consolidation forces objects and events 
to be compatible. Now data generated by 
one activity can be used at another 
segment of the chain. The Double 11 
festival, for instance, is the largest 
shopping holiday in China. From both a 
retail and logistics standpoint, it is 
hard to convey the sheer magnitude of 
this event, with sales dwarfing Black 
Friday and Cyber Monday. In 2020, gross 
merchandise volume was $74 billion 
U.S. dollars, with Cainiao processing 
2point32 billion orders over the 
eleven-day period. Rather than simply 
guessing what consumers will buy at 
the next festival, Cainiao does 
extensive data mining on historical 

numbers to generate predictions. For 
businesses, these forecasts guide 
stocking decisions, reducing their prep 
time from months to weeks. For 
logistics companies, the forecasts help 
to prepare fleets and routes, reducing 
delivery times to the next day or even 
the same day. In the future, the same 
type of purchasing data could also be 
used on a highly localized level.  
Cainiao plans to launch 30,000 
"community post" stations across 300 
cities in China. Based on its wealth of 
purchasing data, the firm could 
identify the most popular products in 
each locale and stock them at these 
post stations.  

The result for consumers would be a 
form of instant delivery.  
Of course, the relationships key to 
consolidation are not always smooth.  
As companies increasingly recognize the 
value of data, access and ownership can 
easily become a source of conflict 
between partners. Data becomes a 
wedge rather than a bridge. One clear 
example of this was the spat between 
Cainiao and SF Express. SF Express is 
one of the key courier services that 
Cainiao used to provide last-mile 
service, delivering around a million 
packages per day. But in June 2017, it 
suddenly stopped sharing its data with 
Cainiao. Blocked from this tracking 
information, merchants had no idea if 

or when their packages had been 
collected—and when they could expect 
to be paid.  
SF Express was defiant, stating it 
would "continue to guard its core 
competitiveness and hopes other 
courier companies will be vigilant 
against Cainiao dipping its finger in 
courier companies' core data." Cainiao 
responded with force, immediately 
suspending SF Express from its 
network.  
The event triggered a dive in the 
courier's share price, rapidly wiping 8 
billion yuan off its value.  
While this particular dispute has now 
been resolved, we can expect that 

clashes over data will only grow. These 
struggles are a reminder that the data 
so crucial for automated technologies is 
not a static entity that exists in a 
vacuum. Data must be constantly 
produced, collected, and shared on a 
daily basis—and this ongoing 
performance depends on mutual 
agreements among parties. These 
agreements are cultural in that they 
draw on societal norms and shared 
understandings. And these agreements 
are political in conferring certain 
advantages, shaping rights, and 
structuring power relationships.  
Data foregrounds the local context 
that swirls around any given automation 
technology, a whole cast of 
corporations vying for market 

dominance, organizations jostling for 
recognition, and individuals striving to 
assert their rights. This specific milieu 
reminds us that automation is occurring 
not just anywhere but somewhere.  
Technology in Context, Technology as 
Culture 61 Domesticating Automation
 To speak of a concrete "where" is to 
push against a vague "wherever," the 
universalizing tendency of automation 
discourse. As we saw in the 
introduction to this chapter, these 
texts are dominated by a global 
perspective, suggesting that whatever 
technology has in store for us, it will 
happen to everyone, everywhere. But 
if we can learn anything from adjacent 
histories of technology like the 
internet, it is that nations are 

increasingly dissatisfied with the 
"global." "Global," in fact, 
frequently means U.S. dominated in 
practice, and part of this pushback is a 
rejection of the American values 
embedded in everyday technologies. 
Critics have long observed that tech 
companies like Facebook, Amazon, Google, 
and Apple all emerge from a 
"California ideology," a "dotcom 
neoliberalism" that seamlessly 
blended the spirit of the hippies with 
the market mind-set of the yuppies. 
Sprung from this particular cultural 
context, their products and services 
are more or less aligned with the 
technolibertarian ideologies of Silicon 
Valley and broader Western axioms like 
consumerism and individualism. These 
values are embedded in the platforms 

that millions use daily, a situation that 
some find intolerable. These "digital 
dictatorships transcend traditional 
national borders, enforcing their 
beliefs, narratives and rules on the 
world at large," stresses Kalev 
Leetaru, effectively creating a new 
form of "cultural colonialism." For 
states with more authoritarian 
leanings, a shift from the global 
internet to a national internet is 
crucial, allowing them to start stripping 
out unwanted values and begin 
embedding their own ideals.  
In the past few years, the same 
domestication can be witnessed in 
artificial intelligence. AI is increasingly 
seen as a "foundational technology 
that can boost competitiveness, 

increase productivity, protect national 
security, and help solve societal 
challenges," and so nations are not 
content to let the United States 
dictate this space.  
Certainly economic concerns are a key 
driver here. AI is seen as a key to 
unlock new sources of value and new 
markets, bringing financial prosperity 
to the country able to achieve a 
commanding lead. But cultural factors 
are increasingly on nations' radars as 
well. "The United States needs a 
human-centered AI framework that 
guides a national policy and plan," 
stressed highly influential computer 
scientist Fei-Fei Li, "a framework 
anchored by our shared American 
values of equality, opportunity and 

agency." Early movers get to put their 
stamp on tech, embedding their ideals 
and ideologies at the heart of critical 
information infrastructures. As a 
result, China, the United States, the 
European Union, and a dozen other 
countries are all engaged in an intense 
AI race. Through strategic combinations 
of policies and programs, each seeks to 
accelerate research, attract talent, 
and claim the next major breakthrough. 
Rather than promoting collaboration 
among allies, countries are increasingly 
digging in, choosing to develop tech 
products and programs that are 
consciously homegrown. States are 
moving from internationalism to the 
indigenous.  

When it comes to automation, then, we 
see the same sort of nationalization at 
work, some of it intentional but much 
simply a by-product of any local 
context. First, each country has its 
own unique blend of software 
developers, hardware suppliers, 
research and development 
laboratories, and academic institutions. 
This domestic ecosystem has certain 
strengths and weaknesses.  
A confluence in factors in China, for 
example, has meant that it excels at 
facial recognition intelligence and 
applications, while lagging behind in 
general AI research and chip 
production. These characteristics in 
turn privilege certain aspects while 
downplaying others. Chinese companies, 

according to one industry insider, place 
a premium on applying technology in 
practical ways to generate profit while 
accepting imitation as part of the 
landscape.  
These specificities explain the power 
enjoyed locally by many platforms—but 
also some of their difficulty in 
spreading behind the Mainland.  
This domestic ecosystem underscores 
the basic but important point: 
technologies will be conceived, 
developed, and adopted differently in 
different locations.  
Second, the economic and policy 
environment differs enormously from 
place to place. Some countries place 

immense amounts of resources and 
faith in automated technologies, while 
others view them as an expensive 
failure, a string of broken promises. As 
one article quipped, "automation" is a 
buzzword for some governments and a 
dirty word for others.  
This view determines the particular 
mix of political and financial incentives 
that are offered around technology 
development. Enticements might 
include a laissez-faire approach to 
regulation alongside long-term loans 
and tax breaks.  
One Shenzhen firm focused on 
automation disclosed that it was 
receiving large payouts from the 
Technology in Context, Technology as 

Culture 63 city of Shenzhen as well as 
a state grant to produce a new factory, 
where "the land, the factory and 
even the office furniture are all 
offered by the government for 
free." These kinds of measures lower 
the risk for companies, taking the sting 
out of the massive capital outlay that 
is often required for the design, 
tooling, and purchase of such 
technologies. Of course, expectations 
may not match reality, as some 
companies have found. After having a 
cobot for a year, "we realized that it 
did not make any sense," admitted one 
firm; "we took it down and sold it." 
Yet for better or worse, this policy 
environment shapes the local technical 
environment, influencing whether a 

company takes the plunge or holds back 
from adopting automated techniques.  
And finally, even ostensibly 
international technologies like 
software standards or wireless 
protocols get modified as soon as they 
"touch down" at the level of the 
nation, the state, or the region. The 
global gets adapted for the local. 
Think, for example, about the way that 
core internet technologies like IP 
blocking and DNS filtering were 
reworked into censorship tools to form 
China's Great Firewall.  
These technologies, together with 
government policy, constructed a 
distinctly Chinese internet that 
diverges sharply from the 

"democratic" ideals envisioned for it 
by the United States. Such adaptation 
molds a technology, making it one's 
own. For states, adaptation ensures 
that technologies match the values 
they ascribe to the nation. For 
companies, it is savvy localization, 
ensuring an optimum fit between a 
technology and a particular market. 
And for individuals, it is often simply a 
way to make things work, to overcome 
hurdles and get some practical benefit. 
"If it is to be of any use," asserted 
Arnold Pacey in The Culture of 
Technology, any technology "must fit 
into a pattern of activity which belongs 
to a particular lifestyle and set of 
values." During this acquisition 
process, the technology itself becomes 
changed: certain functions are 

prioritized, some are tweaked to work 
differently, and others are scrapped 
entirely. Global technology is 
reworked, taking on the hues of its 
cultural surroundings.  
Going further, we might note the 
diverse ways that different industries 
within a country have adopted 
automated techniques. Human 
resources, for example, has seemed to 
embrace robotic process automation as a 
faster (if problematic) way to screen 
potential applicants. Health care, by 
contrast, is still among the least 
digitized sectors in certain areas. In 
the high-stakes area of medicine, AI 
and automation spin up a whole range of 
controversial issues from data 

collection and privacy to the use of 
automated decision making.  
The same kinds of deep problems can be 
seen when introducing automation into 
the social safety nets meant to 
alleviate poverty. As Virginia Eubanks 
has extensively documented, high-tech 
tools have produced devastating 
outcomes for many, forcing some 
systems to be rolled back and replaced 
with hybrid approaches that blend 
computerized processes with face-to-
face interactions. Health care and 
welfare are distinct, each with its own 
histories, considerations, and 
communities—and understanding 
automation in these industries means 
attending to these specificities. To 
comprehend the implications of 

automation in any sector, it is vital to 
comprehend the deep context it sits 
within.  
Digging deeper, we could even start to 
examine how these technologies differ 
from city to city and region to region. 
China's economic planning, for example, 
has long used a "specialized towns" 
modelemploying financial and policy 
incentives to privilege certain kinds of 
technologies in certain areas. To delve 
into the specifics of technology use, 
the next chapter explores two 
examples of automation in a Chinese 
region that has now become infamous: 
Xinjiang. Automation on the Ground
 AUTOMATION IS SOMEWHERE rather 
than everywhere. Instead of the 
fuzzy conceptions of "global work" 

offered by automation discourse, we 
need to zoom into the sights and sounds 
of automated technologies in a specific 
context. Zeroing in on certain instances 
of automation reminds us that they are 
not merely a technical phenomenon but 
a cultural one, grounded in the 
history, language, knowledge, and 
norms of a particular social setting. 
This chapter takes up this task, 
focusing on the use of automated 
technologies in the Xinjiang region of 
northwest China.  
Xinjiang's "automation" of 
surveillance and "automation" of 
agriculture are perfect examples of 
the dark potentials that are typically 
overlooked by automation's bright and 
overly broad visions. Yet the aim is not 

merely to smear or taint the 
automation myth but to show its 
fundamental limits when it comes to 
providing insights about the future 
(and the present) of work.  
A cultural and contextual reading is 
indispensable for understanding these 
scenarios. Here, factors like 
productivity, technicity, and efficiency 
fail to provide adequate explanations. 
To properly grasp what "automation" is 
doing here, we need to add in a 
cultural and contextual dimension, an 
analysis that folds in both operations 
and social relations, both technical 
functionality and racialized histories. 
"Automated" Surveillance in Xinjiang
 A figure walks into the frame. The 
hustle and bustle of a local market in 

Ürümqi surrounds her on all sides, 
with sellers hawking their wares and 
buyers bartering down the prices. But 
the camera focuses only on her. A red 
rectangle appears around her face, 
framing her eyes, nose, and mouth.  
As she wanders through the market 
stalls, it automatically tracks her 
movement, shifting its coordinates to 
match the on-screen image. On a 
server nearby, a notification is 
automatically generated. In a few 
moments, it will appear on the 
smartphone screens of police in the 
area. Via this interface, they can 
access her file with biometric data, 
recent movements, and notes from 
previous encounters. A minute later, 
they appear on-screen, quickly 

surrounding the figure. We need to ask 
you some questions, they explain, we 
need you to come to the station. She 
doesn't ask how they found her; she 
knows. After all, this is Xinjiang.  
Located in the northwest of China, 
Xinjiang is officially known as the 
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region 
(XUAR). It is home to 12 million 
Uyghurs, a mostly Muslim population 
who speak their own language and see 
themselves as ethnically and 
culturally closer to Central Asian 
peoples such as the Kazakhs and the 
Tibetans. In the 1990s, this unique 
identity germinated into a separatist 
movement, with moments of violence 
erupting at times. For the Chinese 
state, these acts were not just a 

security risk, but a kind of existential 
or cultural threat. The crackdown, 
particularly over the past decade, has 
been brutal. Human rights experts 
estimate that up to a million Uyghurs 
have been detained in so-called 
reeducation camps, where subjects 
deemed to be "extremists" are 
reformed into model citizens.  
Uyghur births have been suppressed 
through the use of forced abortion, 
mass sterilization, and birth control.  
And—most relevant for the discussion 
here—Xinjiang has become a test bed 
for automated security technologies, 
with the state deploying one of the 
largest and most intensive surveillance 
systems in the world.  

The best known of these technologies 
is the network of surveillance 
cameras. Cameras in Xinjiang are part of 
the nationwide security system known 
as Sharp Eyes. This system, proclaimed 
the state, would consist of half a 
billion cameras that were 
"omnipresent, fully networked, always 
on and fully Automation on the Ground 
67 controllable." Reporters from the 
Washington Post have documented how 
technology giant Huawei and facial 
recognition company Megvii teamed up to 
create an "an artificial-intelligence 
camera system that could scan faces in 
a crowd and estimate each person's 
age, sex, and ethnicity." Their 
collaboration resulted in a chilling new 
piece of functionality: "Uyghur 

alarms." By deploying this technology, 
companies or authorities could receive 
an automated alert whenever people 
of this ethnicity purchased a product, 
entered an area, or passed through a 
checkpoint. Several other major camera 
companies have now developed similar 
capabilities, offering them to clients as 
a "feature." Technically, this is 
certainly achievable. In fact, computer 
science papers have openly celebrated 
their successes in "solving" this 
problem. With zero consideration of 
ethics, a group of Chinese engineers 
threw themselves into the challenge 
of creating accurate ethnic facial 
detection models for Uyghur, Tibetan, 
and Korean groups.  

The model first extracts an image 
region from the face that includes the 
eyes, mouth, and nose. By focusing on 
these details, the model is able to 
"discover ethnic facial features," 
identifying key morphological traits 
that indicate whether an individual is 
within a targeted ethnic group. The 
model then trains on a sample set of 
known subjects, gradually becoming 
better and better at its task, until it 
can pick out "ethnic" individuals with 
high accuracy.  
Yet if cameras are key, they are only 
the most visible component of a far 
more expansive regime of monitoring 
and control. Since 2013, every new cell 
phone bought in the region has to be 
registered and linked to a real name.  

Since 2017, every vehicle must have a 
GPS tracking device installed so 
authorities can track their movements. 
Wi-Fi sniffers have been set up that 
capture packets traveling across local 
networks, aiming to identify suspicious 
or illicit traffic. And then there is 
the network of checkpoints, outfitted 
with digital scanners, that are located 
around transport hubs, religious 
spaces, and every few hundred meters 
on the street. "We will implement 
comprehensive, round-the-clock, 
three-dimensional prevention and 
control," proclaimed the party 
secretary of Xinjiang; "we will 
resolutely achieve no blind spots, no 
gaps, no blank spots." Pulling all of 

these components together is the 
Integrated Joint Operations Platform 
(IJOP). Driven by the mantra of one 
platform to rule them all, this system 
"gathers together surveillance about 
the residents of Xinjiang, stores it 
centrally, and uses it to make 
automated policing decisions referred 
to in the database as 'pushes.'" Data 
leaks have revealed the vast scope of 
this collection, a database comprising 
250 million rows with a total file size 
of around 52 gigabytes. Where does all 
this data come from? The IJOP pulls 
from a wide variety of information 
sources. Wi-Fi sniffers collect the 
unique identifying addresses of 
computers and phones when they 
connect to the internet. Biometric data 
on individuals such as height, weight, 

fingerprints, iris scans, and blood type 
are included in the system. A mobile 
app that Uyghurs are forced to install 
tracks movement and other digital 
activity. And the formidable array of 
surveillance cameras operating 
throughout the region also feeds into 
this deluge of data.  
Surveillance stresses that we pay 
attention to the purpose of automation
— its content and intention. Automation 
discourse often assumes that any form 
of labor saving is an obvious benefit. 
But what kind of work is being 
automated, and how is it used within a 
certain context? Automation rhetoric, 
with its abstracted and desituated 
framing, its view from nowhere, rarely 
asks these basic questions.  

Its obsession with efficiency produces a 
blinkered focus on acceleration and 
optimization. It matters not what is 
being done, only that it is being done 
faster and "better." But as F. G. 
Jünger observes, this single-minded 
focus on efficiency evades the key 
question: To what end?12 What is the 
purpose of these automated 
technologies? What are they 
accomplishing, and whom does it serve? 
Answering such a question requires 
going beyond functionalist thinking to 
consider the human cost exacted on 
specific lives and communities. Tools of 
optimization can also operate as tools of 
oppression.  

From Automated Racism to Systemic 
Racism
 These always-on technologies have 
been termed a form of "automated 
repression" or "automated racism." In 
some ways, this framing makes sense.  
The best way to operationalize systemic 
racism is by using a system. And so 
Xinjiang's anti-Uyghur project 
leverages a full spectrum of sensors, 
algorithms, machine learning models, 
automated processes, and scheduled 
tasks to transform hostility into a 
routinized activity. By embedding racist 
logic Automation on the Ground 69 into 
combinations of hardware and software, 
this hostility is able to be performed 
incessantly, every minute, of every 
hour, of every day. Like a processor 

chip churning through instructions, it 
runs ceaselessly and unthinkingly 
until it is halted.  
This is how hate is made automatic.  
So this technical regime certainly 
introduces novel conditions. Without a 
doubt, it shapes the lifeworlds of 
Uyghur people living in the Xinjiang 
region. For them, life today is very 
different than it was twenty or even 
ten years ago. And yet as this book has 
argued again and again, to suggest that 
this program is self-running, that 
machines carry out all of this on their 
own, would be a mistake.  
For starters, much of the qualitative 
information fed into IJOP comes from 

in-home visits. "Investigative missions" 
are constructed by the platform and 
sent directly to officers, each 
containing instructions about the 
person to follow up on and what kind 
of information is desired. To carry out 
their mission, officers visit each target 
at home or at work, interrogating them 
about their religious practices, their 
social connections, their personal 
finances, and even their dietary 
habits. Responses to questions are 
filled out by the officer and then 
submitted to the IJOP system. These in-
person interviews are long and labor 
intensive. "One official lamented that 
many colleagues have 'worked so 
hard' to meet the IJOP's appetite that 
'their eyes are so tired and 
reddened.'" These insights suggest 

that IJOP is less about automation than 
integration, becoming a kind of 
technical glue that is able to bring 
together a vast array of disparate 
sources into a cohesive platform. Here 
GPS data from mobile phones sit 
alongside in-person notes about head 
coverings and news from relatives. 
Machine-generated metadata and 
human observation come together to 
form a fuller portrait of incrimination. 
On top of these visits, field research 
from these sites has revealed that 
these technical systems rely on a vast 
army of human labor. Shops and stalls 
must be constantly inspected by police. 
Networks of neighborhood informants 
are drawn on to share secrets about 
their fellow residents. Lab technicians 

capture biometric data through 
Physicals for All, a massive program 
that requires every Xinjiang resident 
between ages 12 and 65 to provide a 
DNA sample. And the dense network of 
checkpoints throughout the region 
must be staffed from morning to night. 
"There are security checkpoints every 
500 meters along all streets in 
Ürümqi," one police officer noted, 
"each guarded by over two dozen police 
officers." All of the information 
created and captured during these 
processes must be inspected for 
suspicious signs and irregularities if it 
is to be of any use.  
Who does all this work? Darren Byler, 
who conducted years of ethnographic 

study in Xinjiang, estimates that all of 
these assessments and activity 
checkpoints require the deployment of 
more than 90,000 police officers and 
more than 1 million civil servants.  
Rather than some new "automated 
racism," these interventions provide a 
way to operationalize an already-
existing racism forged from a cultural 
understanding and upheld through 
state policy. The best way to describe 
the relationship between modern China 
and the Uyghurs is colonial, argues 
Sean Roberts. "Modern Chinese states 
have clearly distinguished the Uyghurs 
and other local Turkic people as 
fundamentally different from and 
inferior to the dominant Han 
population." Whether this colonization 

takes "softer" forms of assimilation 
or starker techniques of oppression, 
the state has never seen these ethnic 
minorities as equals.  
Systemic discrimination against the 
Uyghur stretches back decades, 
producing a common set of prejudices 
and a deeply ingrained distrust of this 
Turkic minority. Seen in this light, the 
oppression of the Uyghur is not some 
unprecedented new chapter, but 
instead part of a historical pattern of 
state-sanctioned oppression of 
minorities that can be witnessed 
repeatedly.  
"The plight of the Uyghurs since 2017 
is reminiscent of the fate of 
indigenous populations in the context 

of settler colonialism elsewhere in 
the world during the nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries," argues 
Roberts, "only with twenty-first-
century tools of electronic 
surveillance to assist in enforcement 
and coercion." These technologies seek 
to sort Uyghur. As James Leibold has 
documented, the state uses this 
multilayered network of surveillance 
to filter its citizenry into those who 
are "normal" and "trustworthy," and 
those who are "deviant" or 
"abnormal" in their thoughts or 
demeanor. In this context, it's clear 
that technologies certainly play a 
powerful role, framing the subject in 
certain ways and establishing certain 
logics. Such algorithms, notes Louise 
Amoore, work to define "new 

thresholds of normality and 
abnormality, against which actions are 
calibrated." There's no question, 
then, that digital technologies provide 
a new flexibility to this dividing line, 
enabling criteria Automation on the 
Ground 71 to be combined and assessed 
in almost unlimited ways. By altering 
the data that is drawn on, the 
weighting of different variables, or 
the rules to be implemented, 
authorities can alter this boundary 
line to a fine degree.  
But if digital technologies are 
undoubtedly influential, it also seems 
vital to acknowledge that most atavistic 
technology: race. Race functions as a 
difference-making machine, 
establishing a dividing line between 

majority Han and minority Uyghur. Race 
attaches traits to these human 
classifiers, establishing one as the 
modern model citizen, the other as a 
dangerous anomaly, an outlier bound up 
in religious beliefs and outmoded ways 
of life.  
The former is superior, the latter 
inferior. And it is this deeply 
embedded racialization that ultimately 
drives the state's use of oppressive 
technologies on ethnic minorities. In 
this sense, automated logics, while 
offering powerful and flexible new 
forms of decision making, are 
ultimately a way of wrapping racist 
beliefs in modern, data-driven tools. 
Digital architectures are tweaked until 

the boundary line between normal and 
abnormal suits the needs of the party. 
These "empirical" results confirm 
what the state has known all along: 
the Uyghur is a deviant subject who 
must be brought in line.  
Casting the Uyghur as abnormal unlocks 
a broad new array of state capacities. 
After all, his existence means that 
the typical checks and balances have 
failed, that normal measures have 
proven unsuccessful. This is the 
incorrigible subject, who "calls up 
around him a number of specific 
interventions over and above the 
customary and family techniques of 
training and correction," noted 
Foucault, "that is to say, a new 

technology of rectification, of 
supercorrection." Abnormality, then, 
gives the state license to unleash 
interventions that are more pervasive 
and penetrating, allowing it to use more 
drastic or draconian techniques to 
break this resistance and remake the 
subject. To deal with this 
extraordinary subject, the colonial 
power will need to take extraordinary 
measures.  
The mass surveillance of Uyghur, 
then, cannot be understood without a 
contextual lens. This is a historical, 
racial, and cultural phenomenon as 
much as a technical one, with one 
people group attempting to dominate or 
assimilate another. To grasp this 
dynamic, it is necessary to grasp the 

state's drive toward a monocultural 
society. Harmony will only be achieved 
when the nation is transformed into a 
homogeneous people. In the mind of the 
party, diverse cultures and differing 
religions are a roadblock to this goal, 
preventing the nation from becoming a 
cohesive body, a "like-minded" unit.  
This drive toward cultural assimilation 
is referred to as "ethnic fusion" in 
government documents, but with Han 
Chinese representing over 91 percent 
of the population, it is more like 
overwriting or deleting rather than 
fusing.  
This massive project is ideological or 
even psychological. President Xi Jinping 
has stressed that economic programs 

will not be enough to resolve ethnic 
tension in Xinjiang: what is needed is an 
"ideological cure, an effort to rewire 
the thinking of the region's 
predominantly Muslim minorities." The 
first step is to disconnect subjects 
from their cultural heritage, to 
separate ethnic minorities from their 
native language, ancient customs, and 
traditional values. As government 
documents stress, reeducation should 
seek to "break their lineage, break 
their roots, break their connections, 
and break their origins." While the 
reeducation camps are exhibit A in this 
program, its reach is both broader and 
more pervasive, extending into the 
nooks and crannies of everyday life. 
Breaking origins means razing houses in 
the name of city planning; it means 

framing clothing and customs as 
"expressions of extremification";27 it 
means banning the Uyghur language in 
some departments and schools; and it 
means standardizing dress in the name 
of modernization.  
All of these efforts aim to carry out a 
double move, destroying an established 
group identity and its distinctive way of 
life and replacing it with something 
new. By sanitizing and homogenizing the 
cultural identity of their targets, 
these policies and programs seek to 
remold them into a form more 
acceptable to the Chinese state. For 
James Diebold, "it's an attempt to re-
engineer what it means to be a 
Uyghur." Part of this reengineering 
project involves a program of coerced 

labor, and to follow this thread, the 
next section moves out into the fields. 
"Automated" Harvesting in Xinjiang
 In the background, a sea of white dots 
stretches to the horizon. In the 
foreground, a reporter begins his 
story. "This is the harvest season for 
cotton in the Xinjiang Autonomous 
Region," he explains. He begins moving 
through the rows, bending down to 
pluck the fluffy wisps from each 
plant and place them into a plastic sack. 
After a few minutes of work, the 
reporter Automation on the Ground 73 
straightens up, puffing from the 
exertion. "It's really a tiring job to 
pick this cotton by hand," he admits, 
"and already I felt pain in my waist and 
back." But luckily, he reassures the 

viewer, much of this process, from 
picking to planting and harvesting, is 
"now fulfilled by machines in 
Xinjiang." The industry, we are 
encouraged to learn, "needs less 
workforce, as more and more cotton-
picking machines are used instead." The 
report cuts to a wide shot of a massive 
harvester driving through a field, 
voraciously devouring six rows of 
cotton at a time with its teeth, which 
are rapidly fed into three intake 
chutes on the front.  
"Increasingly mechanized and smart 
cotton harvesting and planting has 
increased the sector's efficiency" 
notes the narrator. The report cuts to 
a panoramic view of a cotton field with 
a drone buzzing overhead. The drone 

slowly pans across the field, emitting a 
fine mist of pesticide from several 
jets mounted underneath it. The 
drone, we are told, is produced by a 
local agricultural technology start-up. 
Donned in a polo shirt and jeans, the 
start-up's founder appears on-
screen. "As growing cotton becomes 
more concentrated, mechanized and 
digitized," he explains, "Xinjiang's 
large cotton production is expected to 
transform into a high-tech cotton 
industry." The video cuts to a laptop 
with visualization software running in a 
browser. We see a satellite image of 
roads and fields from above, with each 
plot surrounded by a dotted white 
outline. One field in the center of 
the screen is colored in the vibrant 
blues and fluorescent yellows that we 

now associate with LIDAR (light 
detection and ranging) data, the same 
kinds of colors you might see in a self-
driving car demonstration. The 
operator clicks this plot, and a 3D 
model of the field appears on screen. 
The operator spins and tilts the model, 
demonstrating how each detail has been 
captured, from the slightly undulating 
topography to a small cluster of trees 
on the periphery.  
The report concludes by interviewing a 
farmer. He has been growing and 
harvesting cotton for decades, he says, 
but things have grown much easier since 
then. With laborers behind him moving 
through the rows to bend and pick 
cotton, he proclaims that these days he 
has "less stress and manual work 

thanks to technology." The same kinds 
of claims are echoed in state statistics 
and media. The mechanization rate of 
cotton picking in Xinjiang is nearly 70 
percent, stated one article from China 
Daily.  
36 "Xinjiang cotton production has 
already been highly mechanized," 
declared one party official for the 
region in another article, "and even in 
the busy picking season, there is no 
need for a large number of cotton 
pickers." New forms of automation, it 
seems, have been a game changer, 
improving efficiencies and lowering 
labor costs.  
Human Pickers, Human Pain

 Yet these claims of full automation 
are a fable. To interrogate them, we 
can turn to a report by Adrian Zenz, an 
anthropologist who has studied the 
region for years. "Despite increased 
mechanization," he writes, "most of 
the cotton produced in Xinjiang is still 
picked by hand." The immense 
outpouring of labor needed to carry 
out cotton harvesting is coordinated by 
the Xinjiang Production and 
Construction Corp, a state-owned 
paramilitary organization.  
While some of this work has been 
carried out by machines in recent 
years, this trend does not extend to 
all places equally. "In 2019, 
mechanized harvesting in the XPCC 
[Xinjiang Production and Construction 

Corps] regions reached a share of 83 
percent," Zenz notes, "however, in 
southern Xinjiang the mechanized 
harvesting share stood at only 20 
percent that year." There is a 
lumpiness to this automation, an 
unevenness to its deployment.  
Why is the mechanization rate in 
southern Xinjiang so low? Look at the 
grade of cotton, Zenz stresses. 
"Importantly, 99point4 percent of the 
highest quality long-staple cotton was 
produced in southern Xinjiang." There 
are clear disadvantages to mechanical 
harvesting, and these intersect with 
specific aspects of the region. Xinjiang 
is very dry, and the plants can become 
particularly dusty by the time the 
harvest season rolls around from 

September to November. At the same 
time, parts of the region can have 
early snowfall, which can be 
problematic for harvesting. All of 
these aspects mean that machine-
picked cotton could "contain a higher 
percentage of impurities, such as dried 
leaves, dirt/ dust, infertile seeds, 
harmful blemishes, etc." Second, a 
single cotton plant may contain buds at 
different maturities: some bolls are 
ready; others are too young. Ingesting 
all of these indiscriminately through a 
machine lowers the quality of the 
product overall.  
And finally, cotton picked by machines 
requires more refining and purifying, 
steps that have "always been a 
challenge even to this day." All of 

this downstream processing not only 
results in a loss of cotton material but 
impacts the quality of the final 
product.  
Automation on the Ground 75 The 
highest-quality cotton requires the 
highest-quality harvester: a human.  
Handpicked cotton has clear benefits. 
A human laborer has a deft and 
discriminating touch: she will not drag 
in bits of the plant or other debris; 
she can determine which bolls are 
ready; and her harvest has few 
impurities, requiring minimal 
postprocessing. And yet this is brutal, 
backbreaking labor, with no shortcuts. 
Workers begin at 8:00 a.m. and continue 
until 9:00 p.m. at night. By the end of 

this twelve-hour shift, even those 
who are fit and young are hurting. 
"Every part of my body aches" 
testified one 29-year-old migrant 
worker. For those working to quotas or 
getting paid by weight, there is 
enormous pressure to keep up a 
relentless pace. Yet the faster that 
laborers work, the harder it is on 
their bodies. "Hand-picking demands 
both of your hands to be fast, but in 
turn, your hands get hurt easily too," 
wrote one report, "after 3 months of 
cotton picking, most workers are left 
with injured or bruised nails and 
redness and swelling of the 
fingertips." These conditions are made 
harder by constant bug bites and 
Xinjiang's climate, which veers 

between scorching sun during the day 
to freezing temperatures at night.  
Cotton picking is hard labor, in tough 
conditions, with low pay. And yet in the 
harvest season, hundreds of thousands 
of willing workers are needed.  
So where does all this labor come from? 
For Zenz, the answer is clear: from 
coercive labor mechanisms. "We can 
estimate that Aksu, Hotan, and Kashgar 
[provinces] alone mobilized an 
estimated 570,000 cotton pickers 
through the coercive labor transfer 
mechanism," he wrote in a 
groundbreaking report, "other ethnic 
minority regions that operate labor 
transfer schemes would easily add 
tens of thousands, more likely 

hundreds of thousands, to this 
figure." In these schemes, the state 
"mobilizes" workers, signing them onto 
a labor contract and then busing them 
en masse to other regions, often far 
from their villages. Once committed, 
they are locked in, with nowhere to go. 
They will need to work, eat, and sleep 
on-site for the three months of the 
harvest before returning home.  
While cotton picking is in some respects 
the epitome of manual labor, 
technologies of automation and 
optimization are leveraged to mobilize 
workers. Civil servants sent out to 
recruit in the villages of ethnic 
minorities are armed with a smartphone 
application. Through the app, cadres 
record highly personal details from 

each Uyghur household, including 
income levels and employment status. 
"Between 2014 and 2018, Xinjiang sent 
350,000 cadres to Uyghur and other 
ethnic minority villages," Zenz notes, 
"the resulting data is fed into the 
central 'Xinjiang big data platform.'" 
This dynamic resonates with the 
"automated" surveillance of the 
previous section and the in-person 
interviews carried out by police on 
Uyghur households. Here too there is 
a real sense in which digital 
technologies alter the conditions for 
individuals. Captured data classifies 
and codes subjects in new ways, allowing 
profiles to be dynamically assembled 
and forms of oppression to be 
continually performed. And yet these 
data are not produced out of thin air, 

but by local teams working on the 
ground in villages and households. 
Automated technologies are not so much 
self-acting as structuring—functioning 
as the technical glue that scaffolds 
this information, that funnels it into 
standardized forms, and that enables 
it to be cross-indexed and compared 
against other people and places.  
Coercive labor has changed the game 
for plantation owners. In the past, 
they had to hunt for workers, 
assembling a labor force from across 
China composed of a diverse array of 
ethnicities. The use of Uyghur 
communities as a massive pool of 
harvesters has erased this need. 
Plantations simply put in their 
requests, specifying the number of 

laborers needed, and the government 
delivers. "In the past . . . we squatted 
at train stations and long-distance bus 
stations all day, holding up signs and 
asking everywhere," recalled one 
grower; now, thanks to the optimization 
of this "service," they "no longer 
worry about finding pickers." 
Businesses save significant money on 
recruitment and long-distance train 
tickets. A local labor pool, composed of 
ethnic minorities, appears when 
needed. This is labor on-demand, made 
possible by a combination of digital 
technology and racist "superiority." 
Poverty Transformation, Thought 
Transformation
 The app is called the "precise poverty 
alleviation app," a term that slots 
neatly into the government's claims 

that these labor programs are a means 
of breaking the poverty cycle and 
lifting the poor out of squalor. Cotton 
harvesters are certainly paid for 
their labor. Yet the lucrative amounts 
promised and the actual payment given 
at the end of the season are often 
two very different things. On top of 
this, the aggressive measures used to 
recruit Automation on the Ground 77 
workers into accepting this grueling 
work can sometimes be intense. Faced 
with these pressures, workers may 
feel that they have little choice in 
the matter. "In a system where the 
transition between securitization and 
poverty alleviation is seamless and 
where the threat of extralegal 
internment looms large," asserts Zenz, 
"it is impossible to define where 

coercion ends and where local consent 
may begin." Indeed, for many, this 
"choice" seems to be no choice at all. 
Government documents identify the 
need for hundreds of thousands of 
workers in certain regions and speak of 
"transferring all those who should be 
transferred"; other documents refer 
to pickers being "mobilized and 
organised," transporting them to cotton 
fields that are hundreds of 
kilometers away.  
In one particularly damning news 
program broadcast by the state news 
agency, officials arrive at a village in 
Xinjiang advertising jobs in a province 
thousands of kilometers away. After 
two days sitting in the village square 
with no success, they switch to a more 

forceful tactic: going door to door. The 
officials visit one family's house, 
attempting to recruit their daughter. 
Her father pleads with them to go to 
someone else, saying there must be 
others who will volunteer. The 
daughter herself resolutely refuses, 
even under the intense eye of the 
officials and journalists. But the 
officials will not take no for an 
answer and keep up the relentless 
pressure until finally, weeping, the 
daughter agrees.  
"The government continually says that 
people are volunteering to engage in 
these programs," states Xinjiang 
researcher Laura Murphy, "but this 
absolutely reveals that this is a 
system of coercion that people are not 

allowed to resist." And this coercion 
comes with an ulterior motive. 
"Although the narrative is one of 
lifting people out of poverty," Murphy 
states, "there's a drive to entirely 
change people's lives, to separate 
families, disperse the population, 
change their language, their culture, 
their family structures." For the 
state, this program is not simply about 
exploiting a labor force but about 
transforming a mind-set. The 
unwillingness of Uyghur and other 
groups to throw themselves into cotton 
picking is a clear problem, a dangerous 
attitude linked to their old-fashioned 
cultural and religious values. Each 
harvest season presents a chance to 
change this outdated and unproductive 
worldview, an opportunity to transform 

the "deep-rooted, lazy thinking" of 
poor, rural villagers by showing them 
that "labour is glorious." Yet as the 
party is well aware, this deep 
reengineering of hearts and minds will 
not take place organically. Certain 
forms of instruction and persuasion 
will be required. One regional notice on 
seasonal workers laid out a program of 
indoctrination and supervision, where 
work would be accompanied by "thought 
education and ethnic unity education" 
that would steer subjects into 
"consciously resist[ing] illegal 
religious activities"—a clear reference 
to the practices of the mostly Muslim 
Uyghur. Another policy document 
stipulated that labor pools should be 
accompanied by officials who "eat, live, 
study and work with them, actively 

implementing thought education during 
cotton picking." Beyond the cotton 
fields of Xinjiang, researchers have 
noted how reeducation camps are often 
placed alongside factories. This 
proximity demonstrates the "parallel 
purpose of mass employment and mass 
internment." In the reeducation camp, 
workers are trained to be loyal and 
productive subjects, learning to speak 
modern Mandarin, to repeat propaganda, 
and to perform pageants for party 
dignitaries.  
One survivor recounted how her group 
was forced to watch The Hundred-
Year Dream, a film celebrating China's 
economic growth and power. Work 
provides the opportunity to cement 
this training, to demonstrate how far 

they have "improved." Workers march 
over to the nearby factory to turn 
their theory into practice, completing a 
shift of textile labor or garment 
making. Their hard labor serves the 
market. It serves the Motherland. But 
most of all, they are told, it serves 
themselves.  
Xinjiang's non-automated harvesting 
highlights once again the importance of 
grounding automation in an 
understanding of culture and context.  
The Xinjiang region produces a vast 
amount of high-grade cotton that 
requires manual picking to maintain this 
quality. And the Xinjiang region is home 
to the Uyghur, an ethnic minority that 
has been systematically suppressed by 

the state. On the one side, then, we 
have a capital imperative: to maximize 
the value of a commodity while 
reducing labor costs. On the other 
side, we have a racial imperative: to 
dominate and assimilate a people group 
that the state sees as a threat. 
Putting these two factors together 
creates a compelling logic that 
"incentivizes the systematic 
deployment of low-paid ethnic minority 
workers." Digital technologies are 
harnessed to code individuals as 
potential laborers, to collect the labor 
requirements of cotton producers, and 
then to Automation on the Ground 79 
coordinate the transfer of laborers to 
these fields. In doing so, these 
technologies, ranging from apps to 
databases and forms, establish an 

interface between labor demand and 
labor supply. They function in a similar 
way to vaunted "two-sided 
marketplaces" like Uber and Airbnb, 
which deliver a just-in-time connection 
between demand and supply. Yet by 
zooming in on a specific instance of 
automation—particular technologies, 
with culturally inflected values, 
operating on a particular community, in 
a particular region—we can see how this 
"innovative" model can also be 
exploitative. Cotton harvesting in 
Xinjiang uses automated oppression to 
carry out non-automated labor.  
*** Xinjiang's "automated" 
surveillance and "automated" 
agriculture are overlapping but also 
particular: operating in distinct ways, 

enfolding different actors, and 
prompting their own sets of questions. 
And this is precisely the point. Rather 
than a grand and global "Automation," 
this chapter has aimed to develop a 
more modest but detailed portrait 
firmly grounded in a particular 
context. The application and location of 
automation is key.  
For technologists, researchers, and 
policymakers, this basic but 
fundamental point should prompt a 
shift, forcing us to localize our focus 
and acknowledge the social, cultural, 
and geographical context when 
considering the impacts of automation. 
Automation is not some all-encompassing 
"phenomenon," but can be understood 
as a complex interplay of engineers and 

laborers, knowledge structures and 
domain expertise, software systems and 
hardware components, business logics 
and technical protocols—to name just a 
few. This intersection of elements 
converges in warehouses and factories, 
in clinics and prisons, in software 
studios and welfare offices. This is a 
dustier, noisier version of automation, 
where implementation is messier and 
perfect performances are never 
guaranteed.  
In descending from the lofty heights 
of "Automation" to this automation "on 
the ground," it becomes obvious that 
workers would speak different 
languages, that contractors would rely 
on local talent, that companies would 
have divergent obligations to civic and 

national governments, and that 
different industries would have 
different priorities. Specificity is not 
just about adding more detail but gives 
us a better grasp of the technical 
logics and laboring subjects of 
automation. And this analytical 
purchase helps us to more fully 
comprehend what is at stake—what 
automation is doing within a certain 
context and why it matters.  
Contrasting the vivid sights and sounds 
of this portrait with a universal, 
abstracted understanding of automation 
highlights the latter's emptiness, its 
vacuity. To speak of automation 
occurring everywhere is to speak of 
nothing in particular.  

PART 3 The Myth of Automating 
Everyone
 Automation's Racialized Fallout
 AUTOMATION IS A MYTH because the 
catchall figure of "the human" at the 
center of its claims does not exist. 
Over the past century, automation 
rhetoric has consistently evoked a 
generic humanity as the target of its 
impacts.  
In the 1920s, the New York Times 
asked: "Will Machines Devour Man?" In 
the 1940s, one author warned that the 
machine was "gaining on mankind." In 
the 1960s, academic anthologies 
featured articles such as "Man, 
Automation, and Dignity." And in the 
1980s, Leontief and Duchin 
investigated The Future Impact of 

Automation on Workers over a sprawling 
170-page report but never specified 
this worker in detail and scarcely 
acknowledged disparities of race and 
gender across the workforce.  
Across these texts, it is assumed that 
technologically driven change is 
indiscriminate, affecting us all.  
In fact, in automation discourse, "the 
laborer" tends to become a fungible 
object, interchangeable with any other. 
A worker is a worker is a worker.  
If opinions about automation certainly 
clashed, a singular humanity was always 
the target of its impacts. For some, 
automation represented the steady 
march of technical progress that would 

bring about a brighter tomorrow for 
all. In 1965 management theorist 
Herbert Simon promised that "machines 
will be capable, within twenty years, 
of doing any work a man can do." For 
others, automation was part of a 
broader assault on the human staged by 
technology. "It is possible, if the 
human being falters even momentarily  
in accommodating himself to the 
technological imperative," warned 
critic Jacques Ellul in 1967, "he will be 
excluded from it completely even in 
his mechanical functions, much as he 
finds himself excluded from 
participation in an automated factory." 
Yet whether seen as a blessing or a 
curse, the target of these 
transformations never seems to be in 
doubt: automation's impacts will apply 

to all "mankind." The same framings 
can also be seen when we turn to 
fiction. In Isaac Asimov's novel The 
Evitable Conflict, the world economy 
has been automated, with all decision 
making delegated to machines. But the 
narrator assures readers that there 
is nothing to worry about because these 
"calculating machines" have the "good 
of humanity" at the core of their 
programming.  
Humanity here becomes a single unit, a 
united population with a shared fate 
determined by an overarching 
technology. Paul Fairman's novel I, 
the Machine, is another example. The 
jacket asks readers to "imagine a 
perfect world, a world in which no one 
has to work, no one has to struggle, no 

one is deprived of anything he needs or 
wants. A world in which every man can 
indulge his most trivial whim at the 
push of a button." Here the marvels 
of push-button automation will be 
enjoyed by all. "No one" will have to 
slog through a 9-to-5 job; "every 
man" will have his desires fulfilled 
and even anticipated. When it comes to 
imagining technology and the future of 
work, everyone gets lumped together.  
An earlier and more naive time, some 
might argue. But even Frey and 
Osborne's far more recent study 
sketches out a fairly generic worker.  
The widely cited report breaks down 
occupations into routine and non-
routine tasks, aiming to see how 

susceptible certain tasks are to 
automation, or what they term 
"computerization." But this seemingly 
egalitarian approach smuggles in a view 
of man-as-motor-function through 
the backdoor, blurring out the race, 
culture, and class of the individual. 
This abstraction ignores the 
sociocultural factors that have 
historically steered certain groups into 
certain positions.  
Theoretically "anyone" can code and 
"anyone" can drive a forklift, but it 
is clear that not just anyone does.  
Stereotypes like the white brogrammer 
or immigrant care worker point to the 
skewed demographics in certain 

professions, demonstrating that other 
forces are at play.  
Across the decades, then, automation's 
texts have consistently invoked a 
grand vision, a sweeping gesture that 
seemingly encapsulates everyone.  
Automation's Racialized Fallout 85 In 
deploying generic terms like "man" and 
"humankind," racial, social, and 
cultural differences are made to 
disappear, blurred out by these 
catchall categories. Here "the human" 
becomes a beige body, and "humanity" is 
turned into a shapeless mass of labor.  
Automation discourse adopts what 
Atanasoski and Vora term a 
technoliberalist stance, asserting that 

"racial difference, along with all 
human social difference, is 
transcended." Indeed, claims about 
automation derive much of their power 
from this universalizing tendency. If 
automation is proclaimed as a gateway to 
a labor-free utopia, it will float all 
boats, lifting humanity as a whole into a 
new era. If automation is derided as a 
slippery slope to an economic nightmare, 
there will be no escape from the 
horror that ensues.  
Either way, it will happen to us all.  
In deploying these terms, automation's 
human seems to be all-inclusive, all-
embracing. And yet, cautions Jodi 
Melamed, "contemporary racial 
capitalism deploys liberal and 

multicultural terms of inclusion to 
value and devalue forms of humanity 
differentially." "The human" has 
never been a universal category. While 
appeals to mankind posit a united 
humanity, it's clear from the past 
that some are granted full human 
status while others are relegated to 
the subhuman. As Jennifer Rhee 
reminds us, we need to take "seriously 
the history of the human as one of 
exclusion and oppression." Work is 
marked at all times by social 
difference; the history of labor is a 
history of racial, cultural, and sexual 
stratification. Some workers are 
privileged; others are oppressed. Some 
earn more; others earn less. Some are 
celebrated; others are subjugated. 
Taking up Rhee's challenge, the next 

section briefly turns to this history, 
taking note of these exclusions.  
Colonialism and Automation
 Automation's generic human is a by-
product of its apolitical, ahistorical 
rhetoric. In industry framings, 
automation is often presented as 
merely a set of technologies, a suite 
of tools that can be applied to any 
context. In this sense, technical 
processes are strictly separated from 
social values and the history that 
grounds them. An obsession with 
efficiency—an inherently self-
referential value—contributes to this 
blinkered frame. Across the 
industry's many success stories and 
case studies, it is typical for 
automation to define its own 

parameters and then work to improve 
them. This closed logic, as Jennifer 
Alexander stresses, allows "the 
assessment of almost any action or 
process on the basis of the same units 
and qualities it had started with and 
nothing else." When the past does get 
mentioned, it is a past strictly defined 
by technical progress. Pundits compare 
the sophistication of current 
automation technologies against the 
laughable state of the art in earlier 
cycles.  
Previous attempts were too early or 
too crude, the argument goes—but this 
time will be different. All of these 
technocratic tendencies contribute to a 
kind of timelessness, a phenomenon 
lifted out of history that ignores the 

long and highly contested lineage of 
labor that it intersects with.  
Against this framing, we stress that 
automation is situated within history.  
The term "automation" in its current 
sense dates back to 1947. Ford Motors 
wanted to speed up its production line, 
and Vice President Delmar Harder 
suggested that what was needed was 
"more automation." Harder, in fact, 
was referring only to the need to 
quickly move vehicle parts between 
assembly line stations. Yet if his 
reference was rather mundane, the 
term was quickly taken up in much 
broader circles and extended to refer 
to the mechanization of labor, 

particularly where it began to replace 
human operators.  
Of course, the term itself is one 
thing, the broader concept another. 
Here one could easily reach all the 
way back to 1811. Beginning in that year, 
the Luddites, an organized group of 
textile artisans in Britain, began 
months of "machine breaking," smashing 
weaving frames in an attempt to bring 
their bosses to the negotiating table. 
Over the next few years, a region-
wide rebellion arose, only to be 
violently crushed by factory owners 
and military force.  
Whether championed as labor heroism 
or derided as anti-tech reactionism, 
this early moment crystallizes the 

clash between human and machinic 
labor, registering many of the qualities 
that continue to define debates around 
automation today.  
From here, we might skip forward to 
1867, with Marx's foundational 
analysis of capital. Marx was prescient 
in recognizing the impact of industrial 
machinery on workers, highlighting how 
these "vast automatons" integrated 
laborers as appendages and forced 
them to keep apace. Yet Marx also 
foresaw the limitations of this 
machinery and the structural 
contradictions it introduced into this 
mode of production. From there one 
could trace a line through to Keynes's 
introduction of "technological 
unemployment," Noble's Automation's 

Racialized Fallout 87 "social history 
of industrial automation," James 
Boggs's analysis of automation from a 
worker's perspective, Braverman's 
argument about the routinized 
"degradation of work in the 20th 
century," and so on.  
Regardless of the genealogy, the point 
is that automation is deeply 
intertwined with labor history.  
Re-situating automation in history 
stresses its specificity. Automation is 
not disinterested, but rather always 
already embedded within a 
sociohistorical context. Indeed, as Adam 
Greenfield observes, "to consider 
automation with any seriousness is to be 
presented with a long, poignant and 

richly elaborated index of our deepest 
longings and fears." Automation is 
inextricably bound up with a particular 
understanding of what work is, who the 
human is, and who benefits when human 
labor is saved.  
These understandings do not appear 
out of thin air, but like the broader 
concept of automation itself, are 
grounded in the colonial and racialized 
history of capitalism. As Atanasoski and 
Vora remind us, the "engineering 
projects that create the robots, 
program the AI, and enhance the digital 
infrastructure associated with a 
revolutionary new era are in fact 
predetermined by techniques of 
differential exploitation and 
dispossession within capitalism." 

Automation does not begin from a blank 
slate, but from the racially inflected 
values of the sociocultural context it 
sits within.  
A rich lineage of scholarly work 
explores this racially stratified 
history.  
Foremost among these is Cedric 
Robinson's formulation of racial 
capitalism, a concept highlighting the 
fact that the "development, 
organisation, and expansion of capitalist 
society pursued essentially racial 
directions." Robinson's ambitious 
project is to move through hundreds of 
years of history and illuminate, over 
and over again, the often brutal 
racialized difference at the heart of 

value-creating labor regimes. Indeed, 
the ability to command cheap labor was 
fundamental to early forms of 
capitalism. As Jason Moore shows, the 
ferocious expansion of capital both 
financially and territorially during 
the long sixteenth century (1450-
1640) was possible only through this 
constant process of "identifying, 
coding, and rationalizing cheap 
natures." Anything deemed natural 
was a free gift, and race was 
instrumental in this regard. For 
colonists, it provided a mechanism that 
usefully delineated between the full 
human subject, with all her rights and 
responsibilities, and a naturales 
(natural slave) external to this 
category. The indigenous laborer was 
transformed into a natural resource, 

an asset that could be discovered and 
exploited for free. "At the heart of 
modernity's co-productions," notes 
Moore, "is the incessant reworking of 
the boundaries between the human and 
the extra-human." Work itself was 
key to the formation of white identity 
and the construction of white 
privilege. Roediger's seminal text on 
whiteness explains how a white working 
class emerged from the historical 
reconfiguration of labor and the 
shifting status of different races. 
During the period of chattel slavery in 
the United States, the white worker 
could enjoy the formal distinction 
between his waged work and the 
unwaged labor of the slave. In this 
sense, freedom obtained much of its 
sweetness through its direct contrast 

with the bitter unfreedom of slavery. 
"Nothing highlighted freedom—if it did 
not in fact create it," stresses Toni 
Morrison, "like slavery." When 
slavery was abolished, however, this 
dynamic shifted. Waged work was no 
longer the exclusive domain of the 
white worker but had suddenly become 
available to all (at least in theory, if 
not in practice). "White Americans 
could no longer derive 'satisfaction' 
from defining themselves as being non-
slaves and nonBlacks" explains Pegah 
Moradi, "the greater strides made 
towards formal labor equality, the 
more Whiteness had to distinguish and 
elevate itself." Even as employment 
aimed to level the playing field, 
whiteness pursued an invisible but 
tangible sense of superiority, 

developing and maintaining a set of 
systemic advantages. Everyone might 
have been a worker, but not everyone 
was treated—and paid—in the same way.  
Smarter Work, Whiter Work
 The latest chapter of this labor 
history is a push to make work 
"smarter." From the smartphone to 
the smart city, smartness has become 
attached to an increasing variety of 
devices, processes, and spaces. 
Smartness derives much of its 
desirability by contrasting itself to 
the dusty and clunky relics that have 
gone before. Those are legacy systems, 
old-fashioned ways of operating—or 
most bluntly—"dumb" products and 
services. Take the imaginary set out by 
the "smart warehouse" for example. 

Because of its heavy workload and low 
efficiency, the traditional warehouse 
cannot match the pace necessary in 
today's environment. The industry's 
solution is to work "smarter rather 
than harder," using "intelligent" 
interconnected digital systems to 
undertake rote tasks within the 
warehouse. Already here the key 
tenets of smartness Automation's 
Racialized Fallout 89 become clear. To 
be smart is to embrace change, 
identifying faster, easier, and more 
efficient ways to accomplish the same 
tasks. To be dumb is to pass up on the 
opportunities handed out by the 
technological future, consigning 
yourself or your business to the 
slower, cruder, and more error-prone 
past. In the high-pressure economy 

painted by automation discourse, such a 
move lies somewhere between masochism 
and market suicide.  
The smart vision, like automation 
itself, seems apolitical—a natural, 
commendable goal seeking only to 
streamline logistics and improve 
efficiencies.  
Yet smartness comes embedded with a 
set of values about what work should 
look like and who should carry it out. 
As critical race theorists point out, 
smartness has always been a highly 
racialized trait. Sylvia Wynter has 
traced the historical versioning of the 
human, pointing out the work of deep-
seated stereotypes such as the 
"savage" Indian or the "subrational" 

Negro. All of these figures accomplish 
the same move: diminishing the cognitive 
abilities of non-whites while elevating 
the intellect of whites.  
More than mere bigotry, these tropes 
planted a flag in the cultural 
consciousness, claiming reason as an 
exclusively Caucasian domain and 
creating a long-standing link between 
whiteness and intelligence. Building 
atop this history are projects of 
scientific racism, from phrenology to 
more recent data-driven analyses, 
seeking to prove the difference in 
intelligence between the races. Such 
pseudoscience aims to rehabilitate 
racist tropes such as the "oversexed" 
native paying for physical advantages 
with cognitive inferiority.  

These stereotypes are not just a relic 
of a colonial past; they persist in the 
present. White subjects are still far 
more likely to be considered superior 
in terms of abstract thinking ability, 
while Blacks are considered better in 
athletic and rhythmic abilities, a 
"continuing legacy" from the days of 
slavery.  
And—particularly relevant here—
these stereotypes endure in more 
recent imagery around artificial 
intelligence, robotics, and automated 
systems. Scroll through stock images 
tagged with automation and AI, and 
you'll see page after page of white-
faced androids and white-bodied robots 
placed in the thinking pose. Noticing 

this trend, scholars have worked to 
empirically document it.  
After collecting and classifying 
hundreds of images, their suspicions 
were confirmed: as soon as these 
technical systems become 
anthropomorphized through plastic 
molds, avatars, or 3D renderings, their 
facial characteristics and skin tone 
become white. If intelligence is the 
domain of the white subject, then 
making work smarter means making work 
whiter.  
One by-product of this fallout is that 
minority laborers are seen as 
transient, increasing their precarity. 
"Amazon's human workers are safe for 
now," concedes one article, "but the 

tide of automation is rising." Implicit in 
this framing is that the black and 
brown bodies of warehouse employees 
are vestiges, relics of a former 
industrial age. They are needed for 
the time being but will vanish in the 
near future. This narrative recalls 
the famous folk tale of John Henry, 
who responded to the automation of 
railroad work by challenging the 
machine to a pile-driving competition. 
By summoning a herculean effort, 
Henry just edges out the machine, 
winning the battle—but then dies 
immediately of exhaustion. Henry 
becomes "the last of the steel driving 
men," the iconic but final figure from 
a line that is ultimately doomed to 
extinction. "The notion that there is 
an irreconcilable incompatibility 

between Black labor and advanced 
technology—and that the latter is 
destined to displace the former—has 
been one of the most insidious and 
damaging of American racial myths" 
noted George Fredrickson forty years 
ago. These dynamics underscore once 
more the uneven impact of automation.  
Despite its evocation of a universal 
humanity, automation dovetails with a 
colonial history in which laborers of 
color and mechanization were often 
seen as antithetical. As technologies 
improve and automation advances, the 
argument goes, it is only a matter of 
time until these bodies disappear from 
the workplace altogether.  

Together, these insights provide a 
corrective to the historical amnesia 
that tends to characterize automation 
discourse, in which the past chiefly 
consists of cruder technologies and the 
future improvements on them. 
Automation does not take place in a 
postracial vacuum, but rather builds 
atop a history of racial capitalism in 
which the stratification of labor was a 
feature rather than a glitch. 
Accumulation requires "loss, 
disposability, and the unequal 
differentiation of human value," 
asserts Melamed, "and racism 
enshrines the inequalities that 
capitalism requires." While automation 
evokes "the human" and often claims 
an apolitical and "merely technical" 
status, this history means that its 

remaking of labor is always already 
racialized.  
Automation's Racialized Fallout 91 
Automation's Racialized Fallout
 Based on these uneven historical 
conditions, automation's fallout will 
also be uneven. Automation rhetoric, as 
the first section showed, evokes an 
allencompassing humanity when it 
speaks of its impacts. Blanket terms 
like "mankind," "labor," and 
"worker" assert that whatever the 
outcome, it will happen to us all. But 
the mythic human at the heart of 
automation's claims masks the fact 
that some humans will benefit 
enormously from these 
transformations while others will 
greatly suffer. These disparities are 

unfolding along racialized lines. What 
makes this impact so unequal?  First, 
when it comes to automation, the ability 
of a worker to be resilient to 
technological change is directly related 
to that person's financial security.  
Here we are talking not just about 
income but about wealth. In Black 
Wealth/ White Wealth, Oliver and 
Shapiro define wealth as a "command 
over financial resources" accumulated 
across generations that can be used to 
"create opportunities," to "secure a 
desired stature," and to "obtain access 
to life-chances." In this sphere, 
inequality reigns, with communities 
diverging hugely in the resources they 
can draw on. In the United States, for 
instance, there is already a historic 

imbalance when it comes to race and 
wealth. Indeed, echoing the previous 
section on colonial history, we can note 
the correlation in this disparity. As 
Oliver and Shapiro stress, "the 
accumulation of wealth for some whites 
is intimately tied to the poverty of 
wealth for most blacks." Disadvantage 
for some translates directly to 
advantage for others. Because wealth 
is cumulative, building up or down over 
time, these historical dynamics have 
long-term effects, producing ripples 
that carry forward over decades.  
Inequality persists in the present, 
maintaining racial lines. "We're sitting 
in a city right now," noted Anne Price 
in a discussion on black lives and 
automation, "where the average white 

family has around $200,000 and the 
average black family has $8." When it 
comes to wealth, workers do not start 
from an equal playing field.  
For workers, wealth offers a buffer 
from the shock waves of automation.  
Wealth allows a worker to borrow 
money from parents or relatives. 
Wealth enables a worker to survive 
for weeks or even months after being 
made redundant. Wealth can be 
funneled into retraining, allowing a 
worker to transition into a more stable 
and sustainable career. A lack of 
wealth, by contrast, exacerbates an 
already precarious situation, leaving 
individuals with little financial cushion 
to weather the storm. With no 

fallback, a worker might be railroaded 
into a demotion or be forced to take a 
bad job just to keep the lights on and 
the rent paid. Based on these factors, 
one report suggested that automation 
may be "widening the racial wealth gap 
between African American families and 
white families in America." Sharpening 
our definition of "the worker," then, 
highlights deep, racially inflected 
inequality. And this inequality means 
automation's fallout will also be 
racially inflected.  
If wealth is uneven, so are labor 
demographics. Automation is unfolding in 
industries that are already racially 
stratified. Automation has long 
promised to replace jobs that tick any 
of the "4 Ds": dull, dark, dirty, 

dangerous. But it is not just anyone 
who performs this kind of labor. 
Historically, as sociologist Mignon Duffy 
notes, "dirty people" do the dirty 
work. Indeed, despite the massive 
transformations in the past from 
servitude to service, the link between 
dirty work and women of color has 
remained consistent. Humanity is not 
sprinkled evenly across all the 
available employment positions. What we 
see instead is "occupational crowding," 
argues Price—the "unnatural packing 
of people into certain jobs." When we 
look at the past, we can witness a 
double move taking place: people of 
color were excluded from certain 
occupations and relegated to others. 
For workers in the automotive 
industry, for instance, it was clear 

that the adoption of high-output 
technical systems was accompanied by 
highly selective hiring practices. As 
the assembly line sped up and labor 
pressures increased, African Americans 
were funneled into these high-
intensity roles. "In Detroit, they 
haven't got automation but 
negromation," quipped Malcolm X. 
Accelerated and mechanized work was 
matched with a labor force "best 
suited" to take those conditions.  
Occupational crowding can also be seen 
historically in the dirty and dangerous 
work of chip production. Assembling 
processor chips in Silicon Valley 
throughout the 1970s and 1980s meant 
running wafers through chemicals and 
doing chemical testing. Workers 

typically had minimal safety equipment, 
and in fact, the "clean rooms" in 
these facilities were designed to 
protect the chip, not the worker. 
Workers were forced to be in daily 
contact with an array of highly toxic 
compounds. These chemicals attacked 
the bodies of laborers Automation's 
Racialized Fallout 93 over time, with 
workers citing headaches, dizziness, 
nausea, and a number later going on to 
develop reproductive problems. In this 
context, mothers, woman of color, Asian 
immigrants, and other marginal groups 
were specifically chosen by electronics 
management as a more pliable 
workforce, "socially and culturally 
compliant, less likely to agitate for 
benefits, more physically adaptable to 
monotonous and intricate labor tasks, 

and easier to control." The same 
patterns apply when we turn to the 
warehouse sector. In this notoriously 
dangerous industry, women, immigrants, 
and people of color make up significant 
portions of the workforce and will be 
disproportionately impacted. Amazon's 
own statistics reveal that women 
comprise 42 percent of employees 
globally, yet only 27 percent are in 
management; similarly, 26point5 
percent of the workforce identify as 
Black or African American, but only 8 
percent hold managerial positions. 
Indeed, one review of the company's 
workforce found that 85 percent of 
Amazon's Black employees work in 
"unskilled" warehouse jobs. On a 
broader industry level, workers of 
color constitute 66 percent of 

warehouse workers, even though they 
account for just 37 percent of the 
total U.S. labor force.  
These numbers exemplify the 
"unnatural packing" of particular 
populations into particular roles, many 
dangerous or precarious. And they 
mean that the drastic reorganization of 
warehouse labor initiated by automation 
technologies will impact these 
demographics most directly. The Black 
sorter on the factory floor is exposed 
to the full physical and psychological 
brunt of automation, while the white 
manager in the office above largely 
witnesses these effects from afar. 
Both groups may experience automation, 
but they experience it very 
differently. Such deep disparities are 

never grasped in automation discourse 
and its seemingly all-encompassing 
category of the human. It is not 
"humanity" whose jobs will be replaced 
but particular humans.  
Injuries, Activism, and Termination
 What does this exposure to automation 
look like? One of the by-products of 
automation is a spike in injuries. 
Certainly the deployment of automated 
guided vehicles in some warehouses has 
meant that workers no longer have to 
walk miles per day, one of the chief 
complaints of early working conditions 
in fulfillment centers. Pods of items 
are now delivered to workers at their 
station, where software prompts them 
to pick or stow certain objects.  

And yet based on this more productive 
process, workers are also expected to 
be far more productive. At one 
warehouse, quotas for staff have 
increased from 100 items per hour to 
300 or even 400 items per hour. The 
foot and hip injuries that used to 
plague workers have been replaced 
with back injuries from hurriedly 
lifting heavy items from pods. 
Automation equals acceleration, 
drastically ramping up the pace of work 
and the performance targets that must 
be matched. The introduction of 
automated systems brings with it 
"ruthless quotas" and "dizzying 
speed," a combination that led to rates 
of reported injuries quadrupling in one 
warehouse from 2point9 per 100 
workers in 2015 to 11point3 in 

2018point54 Far from alleviating the 
pressures on workers, this shift to 
automated systems—many ostensibly for 
the benefit of employees— has 
actually intensified it.  
For these workers, automation is not 
some abstract discussion point, but 
rather a concrete shift in work 
practices that takes a tangible toll on 
their bodies. Automation is felt 
internally, a musculoskeletal 
breakdown that causes sprains, aches, 
and tears. And alongside these physical 
injuries are forms of cognitive 
pressure and mental anxieties created 
by quotas and metrics. The worry for 
many workers is that these "minor 
injuries" will gradually grow worse to 
the point where ankles, knees, and 

hips cannot carry on any longer, cutting 
off their income source. Rather than 
stop work entirely and recover fully, 
workers often ignore these injuries, 
nursing themselves back to a state good 
enough to make it through the next 
shift. In fact, this response is 
implicitly encouraged through various 
incentive schemes at the company. 
Keeping injuries off the books is key to 
maintaining insurance rates and avoiding 
inspections—and critics have alleged 
that Amazon has systematically 
underreported its true number of 
injuries, concealing the full extent of 
its dangerous work conditions from the 
public. Automation pushes the pace; 
workers are expected to push through 
the pain.  

In a recent letter to shareholders, 
CEO Jeff Bezos seemed to acknowledge 
this damage for the first time. 
"Despite what we've accomplished," 
he admitted, "it's clear we need a 
better vision of our employees' 
success." The company had long been 
known as the Earth's Most Customer-
Centric Company, he reminded them. 
Now it would also be known as the 
Earth's Safest Place to Work.  
Automation's Racialized Fallout 95 His 
solution? More automation. "We're 
developing new automated staffing 
schedules that use sophisticated 
algorithms to rotate employees among 
jobs that use different muscle-tendon 
groups to decrease repetitive motion 
and help protect employees from MSD 

[musculoskeletal disorder] risks," 
Bezos stated. In essence, software 
would track which roles workers were 
assigned to and shuffle them around 
the warehouse to prevent them from 
repeatedly straining the same muscle 
groups. Yet this intervention merely 
slaps a technical bandage on the 
broader problem. This micro-automation 
fails to address the core value that 
drives the broader automation of work 
in the first place: speed. Speed is the 
business proposition of the company, 
promised through offerings like same-
day delivery. Speed is thus the value 
embedded deep at the heart of 
logistical technologies in the 
warehouse. And it is speed, constant 
and unrelenting, that grinds down the 
muscles and tendons of workers until 

they cannot go on. In this sense, such 
technical "solutions" will always be a 
bandage, neglecting the gaping wound of 
antiworker, antihuman logic that 
pervades this contemporary labor 
regime.  
One of the highest injury rates among 
Amazon warehouses is at the MSP1 
Fulfillment Center in Shakopee, 
Minnesota. This area is home to one of 
the largest East African communities in 
the United States, many of whom are 
Somali Muslims, and much of MSP1's 
labor force comes from this contingent. 
Workers at the facility were already 
under heavy pressure to meet quotas, 
and their religious and ethnic 
background has intensified these 

pressures. Devout Muslims pray five 
times per day, a religious freedom that 
their employer is required by federal 
law to respect. And yet there were no 
prayer rooms in the facility, with 
workers having to use the coffee room 
or the work floor itself. In addition, 
workers say this time was clocked, 
meaning that for every minute they 
faced Mecca, their metrics got worse. In 
the lead-up to Ramadan, workers 
worried that the fasting required 
throughout the day would make things 
worse. They requested that quotas be 
eased to allow them to participate in 
the holy month without exhaustion. 
Management stated it would reduce its 
quotas, but the month began and these 
promises were never met.  

Left with little recourse, workers 
began organizing for a strike. On 
December 14, 2018, at 4:00 p.m., a group 
of employees clocked out, bundled into 
hats and gloves, and then walked out 
the doors and into the chilly Minnesota 
air.  
As they exited the doors, they heard a 
resounding cheer from the far side of 
the car park. A large group of off-
duty employees and community 
advocates had been waiting for this 
moment and come to show their 
solidarity. The groups converged, 
holding up signs saying "Respect the 
East African Community" and "We're 
Human, Not Robots." The event marked 
the first coordinated industrial action 
at an Amazon facility in North America. 

Since then, workers have staged 
several more protests and walkouts, 
forcing management to come to the 
table to discuss labor issues. Building 
on this inertia, workers have 
established a community organization, 
the Awood Center—"awood" being the 
Somali word for power. Based in 
Minneapolis, the center works with the 
100,000 immigrants around the Twin 
Cities area, educating, organizing, 
developing leadership, and mobilizing to 
improve the lives of its community.  
Awood will not stand idly by and let its 
community be steamrolled by 
automation. It will not watch meekly 
while a voracious management and 
advanced technologies come together to 
completely dictate the pace and 

performance of work. And here we can 
see the difference between the 
abstract subject imagined by automation 
discourse and the real, living-and-
breathing subjects affected by these 
changes. The former is suggested by 
those generic terms like "humanity" or 
more labor-centric language like 
"workers" or the "labor pool." This is 
a vague but always compliant figure, a 
model user who embraces new 
technologies eagerly, adopts new work 
protocols with enthusiasm, and always 
ensures that her labor ticks the boxes 
required by management. Implicit in 
automation's dreams is what Fred 
Moten and Stefano Harney have termed 
a logistical population, one "created to 
do without thinking, to feel without 
emotion, to move without friction, to 

adapt without question, to translate 
without pause, to connect without 
interruption." Smooth functioning 
assumes submissive workers.  
If the automated subject is generically 
docile, the actual subject is a human 
with a backstory, a person who comes 
complete with a pulse, a mortgage, a 
kid, and a degree of resistance. This is 
not to suggest that every worker is an 
activist, only that every worker must 
deal with a range of life pressures 
that shape that person's ability—and 
willingness—to provide the kind of 
technically mediated performance that 
is desired. Workers can become tired, 
frustrated, and aggravated, especially 
when their livelihood is threatened.  

Automation's Racialized Fallout 97 
Workers pushed to the edge may 
respond by dragging their feet, 
obstructing sensors, exploiting 
technical bugs, or acting in ways that 
are not machine readable. These 
practices may be supplemented with 
more traditional interventions such as 
work stoppages and strikes. "An 
automated subject would allow a fully 
automated society to run smoothly and 
frictionlessly," notes Mark 
Andrejevic, "whereas actual subjects 
threaten to gum up the works." 
Sharpening our focus on the worker, 
then, highlights the antagonisms that 
individuals are able to introduce into 
these systems. Labor is not always 
pliant.  

Workers are not always willing to 
kowtow before the sign of "technical 
progress" that automation optimists 
hold up. When we develop a more 
detailed portrait of workers, we see 
that seamless operations are far from 
guaranteed.  
In response to this and other forms of 
labor protest, Amazon has suspended or 
terminated a number of workers. At 
MSP1, both Bashir Mohammed and 
Farhiyo Warsame were fired—the 
latter for supposed "time-off-task" 
violations after she raised concerns 
about safety protections.  
Wider afield, a number of workers, in 
both Amazon's fulfillment centers 
and its technology campuses, have been 

targeted or let go. There was John 
Hopkins, a Black Bay Area warehouse 
worker who posted union flyers and 
has since been suspended for 
ostensibly violating social distancing 
guidelines. There was Christian Smalls, 
another Black warehouse worker on 
Staten Island who was fired and called 
"not smart or articulate" by Amazon's 
general counsel. And there were 
Maren Costa and Emily Cunningham, user 
experience designers in Seattle who 
said they were fired for trying to 
"create a conversation between tech 
workers and warehouse workers." 
Amazon's ruthless response of firing 
activists and whistle-blowers has been 
called out even by other Amazon 
employees, with Vice President Tim 
Bray quitting in protest. "I'm sure 

it's a coincidence that every one of 
them is a person of color, a woman, or 
both.  
Right?" quipped Bray in his open 
resignation letter. Building on the 
discussions above, we can observe how 
this coincidence is no coincidence at all, 
but rather a natural outworking of 
pressures placed on non-white 
warehouse labor and the broader racial 
logics embedded within neocolonial 
capitalism. Unemployment brings us 
full circle back to the question of the 
human. As Sylvia Wynter notes, the 
genre of the human is now defined by a 
"master code" that sweeps up class, 
gender, sexual orientation, 
superior/inferior ethnicities, and, 
most notably, breadwinner versus 

criminalized jobless poor. This code 
includes race while going beyond it, 
insisting that waged work has become 
integral to our identity, and those who 
do not work are less than fully human. 
The jobless activists here—as well as 
the masses of non-white warehouse 
workers expected to become jobless 
through automation—check at least two 
boxes in the code, doubly excluding 
them from this human category. 
According to this cold logic, racial 
inferiority is "confirmed" by economic 
inferiority.  
Equalizing Automation's Impact
 Responding to activism with punishment 
and firing is a disappointing, if 
unsurprising, response. Industries 
might instead recognize the shock waves 

that automation brings, seismic shifts 
that impact some of its most precarious 
communities the hardest. Through 
their physical and cognitive labor, in 
both the warehouse and the software 
studio, workers have helped to create 
an efficient logistical machine that 
produces significant wealth. And yet 
that work is increasingly subsumed into 
automated systems, and that wealth 
goes to shareholders and managers 
rather than workers. Pushing back 
against automation's generic 
"humanity" helps us see the racialized 
dimension to this dynamic. "Amazon 
needs to share the wealth, because 
we've built a dynasty for Jeff 
Bezos," stressed one employee, "It's 
the same that they do to black people 
since they brought us over here." 

Here we see history repeat itself: 
whiteness shapes the distribution of 
capital, drawing heavily on non-white 
labor while never fully compensating 
it.  
Industry might do its part by taking 
seriously the racially inflected 
history of labor and positively working 
into this through education programs, 
upskilling initiatives, and diversity 
goals within sectors like software 
development and management. For Nicol 
Turner-Lee, "what has happened 
somewhere along the line when we 
have these conversations about the 
future of work, is that we have placed 
people of color in marginalized positions 
outside this economy." She 
acknowledges that industries are 

becoming disrupted, that certain jobs 
are evaporating, and that platforms 
are enabling new forms of 
decentralized work. Based on these 
shifts, certain careers like data 
science have become vital but still 
suffer from a profound lack of 
diversity, locking Automation's 
Racialized Fallout 99 women and people 
of color out. For Turner-Lee, then, 
it's clear that we "have to create a 
pipeline that's going to go into these 
jobs," with communities funneled into 
the production side of this digital 
economy rather than merely its 
consumption side.  
For their part, workers, unions, and 
community organizations might think 
seriously about laying claim to a 

segment of the "means of production" 
and the value it generates. What this 
would look like would vary from 
industry to industry and place to 
place. Responses in this vein might 
include reworking platforms into 
cooperatives, shifting machinery 
ownership to the collective, rewarding 
bonuses to workers based on their 
innovations, or dividing software 
royalties among authors. Common across 
these ideas is that automation could be 
taken up by workers, adapted into new 
forms, and its profits parceled out 
more equally. Embrace the technology, 
stresses Trebor Scholz, but adopt a 
different ownership model, splice in 
solidarity and democratic values, and 
ensure the proceeds benefit all. 
These transformations too might 

acknowledge the history of racial 
inequality in labor, bringing in issues 
such as reparation. "For me part of 
the question of reparations is a 
question of ownership," argues Erica 
Smiley, "when we bailed out General 
Motors that should have been a call 
for reparations: so how much of 
General Motors do we now own?" Other 
suggestions to support workers have 
ranged from a robot tax74 to a more 
progressive income tax so that worker 
entitlements such as universal health 
care, family and medical leave, and 
income support for poor workers are 
not dependent on full-time 
employment.  
Of course, here the topic of a 
universal basic income, or UBI, is 

usually raised. While many variants 
exist, UBI's core premise is that every 
adult receives a set amount of money 
from the state, regardless of their 
work status. As certain occupations 
become more automated and the threat 
of unemployment grows, this scheme 
seems to offer a lifeline: a 
guaranteed minimum income that can 
cover rent, food, and other 
necessities. Given current conditions, 
UBI has increasingly shifted from 
fringe philosophy to mainstream 
solution in recent years, becoming a hot 
topic among policymakers, tech firms, 
and civil society organizations. Yet 
discussions of UBI, like those of 
automation, also tend to reference a 
highly generic worker. Indeed, part of 
the model's allure seems to be the 

"universal" in its title, with 
proponents offering a turnkey program 
where every citizen in every occupation 
is treated in the same way.  
Regardless of who you are or what you 
do, the solution to structural 
unemployment is the same: a lump sum 
that arrives in your bank account each 
week.  
So UBI, for all its promise, can also 
degenerate into a narrow technical 
solution. Given this tendency, it's no 
surprise that Silicon Valley has been 
one of the most vocal proponents of 
the scheme. Clearly there are some 
concrete dangers here. For one, such a 
scheme would let tech companies use 
their social contribution as a kind of 

free pass for unbridled expansion. For 
another, UBI could provide an excuse 
for the traditional social safety nets 
of welfare and health care to be 
systematically scrapped. Yet more 
fundamentally, UBI and its variants 
often fail to understand what work 
provides to workers in terms of 
identity and belonging. Work is more 
than a paycheck; it is about self-
worth.  
Rather than accepting the "tech bro" 
solution of UBI, argues Price, we 
"need a whole new framing of agency, 
of promoting social freedom, of the 
idea of dignity." Echoing the previous 
section, Price notes that for many 
people, you aren't a full human 
unless you're working full time. This 

deeply ingrained connection needs to be 
broken apart: dignity and work need to 
be decoupled.  
From UBI to robot taxes, then, there 
are many proposed solutions to 
automation and its impacts on 
"humanity." Yet grand claims made for 
topdown solutions for "workers" in 
the abstract should be taken with 
extreme caution. Labor is not 
monolithic, and what works for some 
people in some places will not work for 
everyone. As this chapter has argued, 
automation technologies will have an 
uneven fallout, impacting certain 
communities more than others. Any 
viable response will need to grapple 
with the particular mix of social, 
cultural, historical, and racial dynamics 

at play in certain industries and 
contexts. Who is being made 
vulnerable, how did they arrive at 
this position, and what are their 
needs? These are basic but 
fundamental questions often 
overlooked in big picture debates 
around automation and the future of 
work. "The way that it's being 
discussed amongst different elite 
communities is completely absent of 
people, which is kinda bizarre," 
observes Smiley, "we need to be 
thinking about the future of workers, 
and how working people are going to 
evolve." Automation's Gendered 
Inequality
 IF THE MYTH OF AUTOMATING 
everyone obscures race, it also 
obscures gender. How will women fare 

with the introduction of automated 
technologies? On the face of it, this 
question veers dangerously close to 
the overly broad framings already 
critiqued. As Helen Hester reminds us, 
"there has never really been a single 
'feminine' experience of work, given 
the myriad ways in which intersecting 
forms of oppression such as race, class, 
and ablebodiedness have affected the 
scope of women's opportunities, and 
their ability to enter or withdraw 
from the labour force." Who exactly 
are the workers we're speaking of? 
What sectors are they in, and what 
sort of variance exists across it? And 
which countries and contexts are they 
inhabiting? These are all key 
qualifiers to add into the catchall-
category of "women and automation." 

And yet this question can also be 
productive as a catalyst, a way to dig 
into the gendered dynamics operating in 
real-world industries. As we'll see, 
what is most remarkable is that this 
question took so long to ask.  
So how will automation impact women? On 
this question, the studies are 
frustratingly ambivalent. On the one 
hand, women are already behind when 
it comes to labor equality. The 
persistence of a pay gap between 
genders, the unequal expectations 
placed on women in the workplace, and 
the added load of the "second shift" 
of meal preparation, household chores, 
and child care when women arrive home
—all of these factors amplify the 
disparity between men  and women in 

the workplace. Gender dynamics, like 
the racialized dynamics of the previous 
chapter, mean that the playing field 
of labor was never level to begin with. 
Women are starting from a more 
precarious position, impacting their 
ability to resiliently respond to 
technical shifts in the workplace.  
Then there is the type of work that 
women carry out. One U.K. study found 
that women held 9 percent of highly 
automatable positions, as opposed to 4 
percent for men, with "migrants, and 
lone parents (typically women)" 
particularly likely to hold jobs with 
"high automation potential." Another 
U.S. study found that Hispanic women 
were most likely to work in "highrisk" 
occupations, with "high-risk" entailing 

an automation probability of 90 percent 
or higher.  
And a third study found that "women, 
on average, perform more routine or 
codifiable tasks than men across all 
sectors and occupations." Echoing the 
previous chapter, these studies point 
out that work is not distributed 
equally. Women have historically been 
blocked from certain types of work and 
crowded into others. A good proportion 
of this work, as the studies note, is 
low-paid and highly routine labor. This 
more predictable and controllable work 
presents low-hanging fruit in terms of 
technical challenge, placing it at the 
front of the line when it comes to the 
introduction of industrial and 
automated technologies.  

On the face of it, this combination of 
existing precarity and higher 
replaceability suggests a bleak future. 
Already behind in pay and privileges, 
the female worker will also be the 
first to go. Yet at the same time, 
studies tend to place great faith in 
the adaptability of women to survive 
and even thrive in this environment. 
One study found "that women adapted 
to the new labor market realities by 
shifting disproportionately toward more 
high-skill occupations" and suggested 
that automation's "strong 
complementarities with tasks that 
require a high level of human 
interaction" mean that women's 
"comparative advantage in 

interpersonal and social skills" gives 
them a strong edge.  
The association between women and 
these softer interpersonal abilities is 
a stereotype, to be sure, but one that 
can also be found in feminist accounts. 
Sadie Plant's "Genderquake" from 
1997 was prescient in anticipating the 
shock waves that automation will bring. 
In the essay, Plant points to a double 
movement in the West: a decline in 
heavy industry and manufacturing and 
a corresponding rise in the information 
and service sectors. This Automation's 
Gendered Inequality 103 shift, she 
predicted, would mean major 
transformations in the labor market.  

The old skills of "muscular strength 
and hormonal energies" would become 
less necessary, losing their superior 
status; "speed, intelligence, and 
transferable, interpersonal and 
communications skills" would ascend in 
their place, becoming in demand.  
For Plant, the implications are obvious. 
In the new labor environment, men 
would become the dinosaurs, unused to 
the pace of change and the suppleness 
required. Women would be the new 
apex predators, "advanced players of 
an economic game for which self-
employment, part-time, discontinuous 
work, multiskilling, flexibility, and 
maximal adaptability" are now key.  

Ultimately, then, the studies are 
ambiguous. On the one hand, women 
occupy more precarious positions that 
are (supposedly) more prone to 
automation. On the other hand, women 
are (supposedly) more adaptable, able 
to flex skills that will be desirable in 
the forthcoming future of work. Such 
studies, produced by business schools 
and think tanks, tend to be framed in 
optimistic language, transferable to an 
action plan or policy document.  
However, we might also read these 
findings more critically or cynically. To 
be "prone to automation" is to be 
expendable and unemployed, an 
individual who may struggle to find the 
next job and the next paycheck. To be 
"adaptable" is to be able to survive in 

potentially worse conditions, to make 
ends meet in the face of overwhelming 
adversity. In this light, "adaptability" 
joins other neoliberal terms like 
"resiliency" and "flexibility" in 
placing the burden of employment 
squarely on the worker's shoulders 
while relinquishing the state and 
industry from any responsibility. The 
adaptable worker is the precarious 
worker who must invest in herself, 
spending her meager free time and 
income on retraining for the 
contemporary workplace. While some 
may find these shifts empowering, they 
should also be accompanied by a series 
of simple but critical questions: Who 
must adapt, what are they adapting 
for, and why?  Studies on women and 
automation point to a profound gap. 

While their verdicts may be ambivalent, 
their broader point is unequivocal: 
automation has long overlooked gender. 
For decades, automation discourse has 
evoked the broad category of humanity 
and labor without ever examining the 
implications for women in any detail. 
The fact that men and women are 
clustered in different occupations, 
that work is stratified along gender 
lines, that women are already behind 
in terms of labor equality—these basic 
dynamics were barely taken into 
consideration. As early as 1970, Jean 
Wells observed that studies on 
automation "cover all workers and give 
little consideration to any separate 
effects on women," forcing her to 
wrestle her results from generic 
statistics.  

And this gap has largely persisted 
until the present. Frey and Osborne's 
highly cited 2013 study, for instance, 
constructs a highly generic worker, 
ignoring gendered disparities in the 
workplace. Across seventy-eight pages, 
it never mentions the word "female" 
and features the word "women" only 
twice—one in the phrase "foremen and 
forewomen," the other a paper on the 
industrial revolution in the 
bibliography. The end result is a void 
that is at once shocking and entirely 
unsurprising. Anne Hegewisch, Chandra 
Childers, and Heidi Hartmann are able 
to say that their 2019 report 
"presents the first comprehensive 
gender analysis of the potential impact 
of technological change on women." Any 

serious consideration of automation, 
then, must begin by sharpening the 
definition of the worker and 
acknowledging the gender-based 
inequalities that continue to pervade 
work. The all-embracing rhetoric of 
automation obscures these dynamics, 
bracketing out the daily disparities 
faced by women in the workplace.  
Breaking Down the Female Body
 To examine these disparities, we can 
return briefly to the warehouse, 
picking up the thread begun in the 
previous chapter. The affordances of 
digital technologies provide new hinges 
for control and exert new pressures 
on workers. Always sensing and always 
calculating, these automated regimes 
take a toll on the bodies and minds of 

laborers. Here we zoom into the 
gendered dimensions of this fallout, 
the way injuries and penalties impact 
women workers.  
The relentless pace of work at Amazon 
warehouses is well known. Several 
major exposés on fulfillment centers 
have concentrated on the frenetic 
speeds that are expected of workers, 
the dense regime of digital Taylorism 
that measures this performance, and 
the range of punishments doled out to 
workers who fail to meet these 
targets. These targets are applied 
unilaterally, with no adjustment for 
periods of illness, or grieving, or 
family crises. A union in the U.K. 
documented how a woman with breast 
cancer was allegedly put on a 

Automation's Gendered Inequality 105 
"performance improvement plan," 
while another was sent on a business 
trip the day after having a miscarriage. 
After clocking in, every second counts, 
leading to anecdotes of workers 
skipping bathroom breaks or peeing in 
jars in order to maintain their quotas. 
This breakneck tempo must be 
maintained hour after hour, day after 
day, week after week.  
Less highlighted is the unending 
repetition of this labor. One of the 
singular qualities of automation in this 
instance is its ability to combine 
frenetic activity with mind-numbing 
boredom. "My body is grudgingly 
adjusting to the job, but my brain 
isn't," reflected Emily 

Guendelsberger in her account of work 
at an Amazon fulfillment center, 
"I've started dreading the monotony 
even more than the pain." In her case, 
the job consisted of checking her 
handheld scanner, walking to that 
location in the warehouse, picking up an 
item, then checking her scanner for 
the next product. Scan and pick, scan 
and pick, ad infinitum—for eleven 
hours straight. Ways to relieve this 
monotony were severely limited. 
Headphones for listening to podcasts or 
music were verboten. Conversation with 
other workers was banned or at least 
significantly discouraged. And even if 
it wasn't, the optimized picking routes 
workers took through the cavernous 
warehouse space meant that contact 
with other associates was often 

minimal. Work on the top floor was 
dreaded by workers not only because 
of the longer distances to walk, but 
because it was so lonely.  
The result is a strange blend of 
breakneck pace and silent isolation. 
The work demands an absolutely 
grueling physical performance while 
also stipulating that the worker's 
mental and social capacities be 
suppressed. "Low-wage workers," 
observes Guendelsberger, "have a 
strong-bordering-on-mandatory 
incentive to crush those unuseful 
human parts of themselves down to 
atomic size." Creativity, ingenuity, 
problem solving—in this position, none 
of these aspects are wanted. The body 
pounds out mile after mile, walking, 

squatting, lifting, and pushing through 
the pain, while the mind is given 
nothing at all to occupy itself.  
For workers, this synergy of forces 
produces an immense and unrelenting 
pressure, a chain of tasks that 
stretches into the distance with 
nothing to provide relief or even 
variation. Alongside their physical 
health, their mental health starts to 
break down. "I cry on my way to work," 
admitted one employee in a post on a 
forum, "I hate not speaking to a single 
person for my entire 12-hour shift." 
The monotony led her to stare 
incessantly at the clock, wishing the 
shift was over so she could at least go 
home to sleep before starting again. 
"My mental health is starting to 

affect me physically as well, on my way 
to work yesterday I had to pull over on 
the freeway to vomit." Another 
worker confessed that she had her 
"first amazonian mental breakdown at 
work last night. I think I've officially 
lost my absolute mind working here. It 
started with me talking to myself but 
everyone does that here . . . last 
night I just sat down on my uboat 
[utility cart] and cried." Responses to 
these posts commiserate and add their 
own stories of depression and anxiety, 
slowly generating a potent portrait of 
worker suffering in the twenty-first 
century.  
In some cases, mental health declines 
to the point where suicide is 
considered. One woman at MSP1 admitted 

she wanted to kill herself and 
mentioned using box cutters; another 
woman at a fulfillment center said she 
was going to stab herself in the 
stomach. These cases slot into a long 
litany of mental breakdowns 
documented at warehouses over the 
past five years. At a Florida 
warehouse, one woman said "she was 
going to go home and kill herself "; a 
supervisor "witnessed her hurting 
herself because she had been fired 
and felt she 'did not have anything to 
live for.'" It's worth noting here 
that firing at Amazon fulfillment 
centers is an entirely automated 
process. One way to be fired is to lose 
all of the six points you start out 
with. Leave your shift an hour before 
you're due to be finished, and you 

lose a point. Don't come to work and 
don't call in? Lose three points. But a 
more pervasive way is through failing 
to meet quotas. Whether picking or 
sorting, employees are exhaustively 
tracked and expected to consistently 
hit ambitious targets. In just one 
facility over the course of one year, 
roughly 300 full-time associates were 
terminated for inefficiency. Amazon's 
system monitors the worker in real 
time and "automatically generates any 
warnings or terminations regarding 
quality or productivity without input 
from supervisors." This termination 
system demonstrates how automation is 
about control as much as efficiency. 
"The impulse to automate," observed 
David Noble, was encouraged by the 
"continuing struggle of management to 

gain greater control over production, 
weaken the power of unions, and 
otherwise adjust a recalcitrant work 
force to the realities of lower pay, 
tighter discipline, and Automation's 
Gendered Inequality 107 frequent 
layoffs." To be sure, firing is faster 
with software that fills forms and 
updates rosters than with each case 
being manually reviewed by someone in 
human resources. But more 
fundamentally, this system lets 
management dictate the rules and 
logics of termination while removing any 
agency from workers. For workers who 
are penalized or even terminated, 
there is no one to negotiate with, 
nowhere to plead their case. When the 
algorithm is your arbiter, the system's 
decision is final: it cannot be reviewed 

or revoked. Automated firing, then, is 
a prime example of a broader 
imperative to restrict the political 
agency of workers.  
Technical systems seek to shrink the 
field of action available to organized 
labor, aiming to diminish the space of 
contestation to zero.  
Suicidal ideations can also take the 
form of a cry for help. Amazon 
workers sometimes write messages on 
the sides of boxes around the 
warehouse.  
While these are mostly banal or even 
positive, one forum post documented a 
much darker version. Scrawled in black 
marker on a cardboard carton was the 

phrase: "Im gonna jump off the third 
floor." One respondent slapped a 
white sticker below the phrase, writing 
"call for help" and listing the phone 
number of a mental health line. But 
other comments were not so kind. One 
arrow pointed to the phrase and 
quipped, "do a barrel roll." Another 
joined in on the dogpiling, scribbling "do 
a flip, fucker" with a Sharpie. The 
worker who originally posted the 
message is asking for help, for some 
kind of support from those around 
her. But these responses are snide 
and disparaging rather than uplifting.  
Here we can see how the technical 
shapes the social, with automation 
creating an environment that actively 
undermines solidarity.  

Digital tracking means that every 
second counts, forcing the worker to 
keep moving. Rather than discussed 
over an adequate break period, the cry 
for help is hastily scrawled on a 
cardboard box. Algorithmic route 
planning fans workers out, ensuring 
that contact with others is brief or 
non-existent. The cry for help is not 
a face-to-face conversation, but a 
message left for others to hopefully 
find in the vast maze of the 
warehouse. And finally and most 
fundamentally, this automated regime 
is highly atomized, with stats, rewards, 
and punishments attached to each 
individual. In the digital logic employed 
by management, there is no "we," no 
sense of togetherness. In fact, 

gamified initiatives like Power Hour, 
where pickers compete for a gift 
certificate and other prizes, actively 
set workers against each other. Rather 
than a community, warehouse workers 
are only a temporary aggregation of 
three thousand individual profiles. 
It's unsurprising, then, that the 
message was met more with hostility 
than sympathy. This mix of automated 
technology pries workers apart, 
considering each as a stand-alone unit 
in competition with others. Unity and 
communality are incompatible with this 
work regime. If forms of solidarity do 
persist, they do so in the face of this 
dominant logic.  
These injuries echo the unequal 
fallout seen in the previous chapter, 

the way that automation's impacts fall 
unevenly along racial and gender lines. 
This dynamic underscores the need to 
go beyond the generic definition of 
"labor" offered by automation 
discourse. Automation does not apply to 
a monolithic humanity but to particular 
people with particular genders in 
particular places.  
Policies and plans that fail to account 
for gender will miss these key dynamics 
and the way they shape the interaction 
between automated technologies, 
human labor, and workplace practices. 
For organizations advocating for better 
work conditions, this nuancing of "the 
worker" also nuances the rights and 
demands that are advocated for. 
Gender and race push organizers to 

think beyond the paycheck, 
foregrounding an array of key concerns 
ranging from equality to discrimination 
and sexual harassment.  
Work and Non-Work
 Yet while labor conditions are 
certainly central and significant, 
focusing on women confronts us with a 
more fundamental question about what 
work is. Within automation discourse, 
"jobs" and the "future of work" go 
hand in hand. Countless debates focus 
on jobs. Which jobs will be created, and 
which jobs will be deleted in the coming 
technological apocalypse? The same 
assumptions can be seen when discussing 
the target of automation, which is 
always the workplace as traditionally 
understood. If automation is "coming 

soon to assembly lines, warehouses, and 
hallways near you," as Brynjolfsson 
and McAfee warn, then the question is 
which workers will be left on the 
assembly line or in the warehouse. 
Implicit in these debates is that work is 
something carried out by staff for an 
employer to obtain an economic benefit. 
Work is waged work, performed for a 
price. Automation Automation's 
Gendered Inequality 109 discourse 
accepts this capitalist concept of work, 
a narrow definition that "has come to 
dominate the concept of work itself." 
Why should work be defined in this 
way? Already it should be clear that a 
gendered dimension is at work here, a 
high-stakes framing that puts women 
on the losing side. Accepting this 
conventional view of "work" privileges 

the labor of some while excluding the 
contributions of others.  
Pushing against the myth of automation 
means pushing against this narrow 
conception of work. In these final 
sections, then, I draw on feminist 
scholars to challenge this status quo 
account and its self-serving 
compartmentalization of work and non-
work. We'll shift from the warehouse 
to the home, examining domestic 
automation and tracing how gender has 
deeply shaped the development of 
technology from early on.  
What counts as work? For feminist and 
theorist Silvia Federici, this question is 
not merely semantic but highly 
strategic in defining the site of 

political struggle. Work is typically 
regarded as work only when certain 
people ("employees") carry it out in 
certain places ("the workplace") and 
receive monetary compensation 
("income") for it. If the accumulation 
of capital and the exploitation of labor 
occurs only with waged workers on the 
factory floor, then resistance against 
this exploitation is constrained to a 
narrow arena. This is the laudable but 
limited work of advocating for shorter 
hours, higher pay, better conditions, 
and so on. But what happens when we 
reconsider this self-serving 
definition, when we open back up the 
concept of work itself?  If work is 
something more basic and yet larger—
the broader constellation of practices 
Susan Ferguson refers to as "life-

making"—then the arena of contest 
also extends to everywhere those 
activities occur. From caring for 
children to tending the sick and 
maintaining the house, this is the vast 
terrain of reproductive work, the 
crucial but often invisible labor 
needed to sustain current and future 
workers. Clearly this is skilled work, 
often drawing on a sophisticated mix of 
cognitive, social, and tacit capabilities 
adapted for a specific person or 
context. And yet these tasks are 
viewed as duties or necessities, "an 
extension of naturally occurring 
feminine (and often, quite specifically, 
maternal) predilections, affects, 
modes of intimacy, personal 
preferences," and so on.  

Historically these skills were 
developed in the home and performed 
by women without pay. Whether framed 
as supporting the family or sustaining 
the so-called breadwinner, this 
"women's work" was never elevated 
to the level of work proper. It is here 
that Marxist critiques falter. Like 
automation discourse, they accepted 
the narrow definition of what work is, 
limiting their scope and power. "Marx 
failed to recognize the importance of 
reproductive work because he accepted 
the capitalist criteria for what 
constitutes work," Federici asserts; 
"he believed that waged industrial 
work was the stage on which the battle 
for humanity's emancipation would be 
played." For Federici, it is 
reproduction, rather than production, 

that presents the key site of labor 
struggle in the twenty-first century 
and the one that holds the most 
promise for advancing the political 
agency of women. Rather than focusing 
exclusively on waged labor outside the 
home, reproduction shifts our 
attention to unwaged labor inside the 
home. Our gaze turns from industry to 
domesticity, from generating products 
to generating the key figure behind all 
those products: the worker herself. 
For Federici, this paradigm shift 
reconfigures "our image of society as 
an immense circuit of domestic 
plantations and assembly lines where 
the production of workers is 
articulated on a daily and generational 
basis." Worksites proliferate and 
workers swell. Suddenly we see care 

work and house work, affective labor 
and immaterial labor. Work is here at 
the kindergarten or play center; it is 
there at the church, the mosque, or 
the synagogue. We see individuals 
working with grandparents and 
grandchildren, with communities and 
charities, with communal gardens and 
environmental projects. Immediately it 
is clear that work is taking place 
everywhere, all the time. Dismissing 
this labor as non-work dismisses its 
crucial contribution and marginalizes 
those who undertake it.  
Automation's Mixed History
 Automation's tight coupling with 
colonial and capitalist histories means 
that it adopts these same assumptions. 
Here, "work" is paid work at the 

office, clinic, or factory; "non-work" 
is the unpaid reproductive labor 
carried out by women that takes place 
in the home or elsewhere. Given these 
patriarchal assumptions, the history of 
automation becomes clear. Automation 
has concentrated heavily on "work," 
pouring vast amounts of time, research, 
and capital into optimizing labor at the 
(male-dominated) worksite, while 
Automation's Gendered Inequality 111 
largely ignoring what is "not work"—
housework, care work, sex work, and 
other forms of gendered or 
domesticated labor.  
Indeed, it is striking how untouched 
this sphere is by the "disruptions" of 
the technology sector. Automated work 
in the office, the warehouse, or the 

factory is the focus of starry-eyed 
futurists and gushing tech editorials. 
Every quarter, industry rolls out the 
latest "game-changing" innovations, 
technologies that will reinvent 
outdated processes and optimize 
inefficient workflows.  
While these promises often fall flat, 
they nevertheless demonstrate the 
focal point of the automation imaginary. 
When set against this frenzy of 
activity, the "non-work" of 
reproductive labor is still non-
automated. Activities like caring, 
teaching, feeding, cleaning, and 
sustaining continue to be carried out in 
person, without technical augmentation 
or mediation. This is manual labor, done 
by hand, with no shortcuts. "Amidst all 

this prophesied social change to come, 
these so-solid promises, underpinned 
by gadget-scale instantiation, 
algorithmic advancement, prototypical 
experimentation, hard investment," 
observe Caroline Bassett, Sarah 
Kember, and Kate O'Riordan, this is 
one sphere of life "that often 
appears obdurately unchanged." In the 
history of technology, the home is an 
afterthought. The devices that did 
make their way into the household—the 
microwave, the washing machine, the 
vacuum, the refrigerator—did so 
almost accidentally. They were 
originally conceived for military or 
industrial use, those lucrative sectors 
firmly associated with traditional 
definitions of "work." Only later, 
sometimes decades later, were they 

repurposed and marketed for the 
home. "Given that much domestic 
technology has its origins in very 
different spheres, rather than being 
specifically designed to save time in 
the household," writes Judy Wacjman, 
"it is not surprising that its impact on 
domestic labour has been mixed." 
"Mixed" suggests that technology has 
not lived up to the hype, that its 
domestic benefit has been far less 
than advertised. Rather than removing 
work, automation reorganizes it—and 
sometimes adds more. In her book 
Pressed for Time, Wacjman 
demonstrated that household 
appliances such as microwaves and deep 
freezers made no impact on the time 
women spent doing food preparation and 
cleanup—and some appliances like a 

clothes dryer actually increased time 
devoted to these chores. Wacjman's 
findings line up with Ruth Schwartz 
Cowan's much earlier work on 
household technology from the mid-
1980s. In her celebrated study, Cowan 
showed that new devices made some 
chores less physically demanding but 
also introduced a whole range of new 
tasks. This was coupled with rising 
standards in domestic labor and higher 
expectations placed on the housewife. 
Now she was expected to provide a 
rotating menu of elaborate and varied 
meals, to ensure that rugs and floors 
were spotless, to iron clothing for 
family members once a week—in
 short, to maintain their higher 
standards through her higher labor 
output.  

Far from erasing work, Cowan argued, 
technology in the home led to "more 
work for mother." Why was this 
history so mixed, failing to produce a 
meaningful lessening of labor? Why was 
the factory a focal point while the 
household received technology's 
hand-me-downs decades later? While 
there are undoubtedly countless 
factors at play here, many seem to 
come back to that core distinction 
between work and non-work. Work 
takes place in the workplace, a 
productive process that creates value 
for companies and for the nation as a 
whole. That value can be measured in 
terms of manufacturing quotas, or 
annual sales, or gross domestic product. 
Non-work takes place in that nebulous 

sphere outside the workplace. It is 
"non-productive" at least in part 
because it cannot be measured in 
conventional terms. Who knows the 
myriad tasks that take place in the 
hidden abode of the home? And even if 
you did, how could you quantify a year 
of raising a child, or providing a 
consistently clean home environment, 
or offering a loving and supportive 
conversation? Without being sold for a 
dollar value on the market, these 
contributions become immeasurable. And 
this messy, nebulous quality means 
that this realm of activities is 
bracketed off from the economy and 
economic analysis.  
Based on this patriarchal distinction, 
the development of technology becomes 

highly logical. Resources in the form 
of capital investment, research 
programs, government incentives, and 
specialized training are poured into the 
productive and profitable sphere of 
work. These resources are finite, 
limited, part of a zero-sum game. And 
so this vast concentration of money, 
talent, and time is simultaneously a 
diversion from the unproductive and 
unpaid sphere of non-work. The 
military-industrial arena, as we saw, is 
given ample time and capital to 
experiment and innovate, while the 
home remains an Automation's 
Gendered Inequality 113 underfunded 
afterthought. Caring, cleaning, and 
nurturing continue much in the same 
vein as in previous generations, and 
this is not just a function of their 

non-routine nature but because of 
how work itself is defined. Jason Smith 
notes, "these sorts of activities, 
however necessary they may be for 
the reproduction of capitalist class 
relations, are always the last to be 
rationalized, that is, made more 
efficient, and less onerous, by means 
of labor-saving innovations." Since at 
least the early 1980s, feminist 
scholars have hoped that automated 
technologies would dispense with the 
need for housework altogether. But 
this mixed history suggests 
fundamental reasons why those dreams 
of a labor-free liberation will never 
materialize. The paths pursued by 
automation adopted a distinctly 
gendered dynamic.  

A Man's Home, a Man's Castle
 When we do see automation applied to 
the home, this technology is typically 
developed by and for men.  
Advertising for home automation has 
been aimed squarely at a masculine 
audience. Search for "home 
automation" online, and you'll be 
scrolling through countless variations 
of the same image: a man, dressed in a 
suit, with his finger poised over a 
smartphone screen brimming with 
control panel icons.  
Whether completing their bachelor pad 
or taken on as a weekend project, 
these are systems installed and 
maintained by men. In fact, when it 
comes to purchasing devices and choosing 

features, women's interjections can be 
regarded as interference. "Am I the 
only one with a wife who is suckin' the 
fun out of their home automation 
plans?" complained one man on a home 
automation forum. You need to work on 
your WAF, your "wife acceptance 
factor," suggested the top-rated 
reply. Keep it simple stupid, 
recommended another user; your 
automation strategy should obey the 
principle of the "smart home for dumb 
people." Home automation offers 
mastery over the domestic domain. By 
wiring up connected thermostats, smart 
lighting, media systems, and other 
household gadgets, the user can attain 
unprecedented levels of control over 
their living space. Through clever 
combinations of software and hardware, 

the home itself becomes a system that 
can be managed and manipulated. Home 
automation, then, comes with a distinct 
view of what the home is and what it 
needs to accomplish. To set the room 
temperature three degrees cooler, 
secure the perimeter, dim the lights, 
and cue the sports channel—these are 
the kinds of tasks that home 
automation strives to manage and 
manipulate.  
Because of this focus on technically 
oriented men, housework is rarely 
included in the imaginary of the 
automated home. With the exception of 
robo-vacuums, devices to cook meals, 
scrub bathrooms, make beds, and carry 
out the litany of other everyday 
household chores are largely absent 

from the glossy brochures and 
convention displays of home automation 
companies. As Anne Berg observed: 
"housework has no place in the general 
idea of what a smart house is." Of 
course, this is not to suggest that 
these tasks are exclusively women's 
work, but to simply observe that home 
automation as a vision panders to men 
while failing to account for women 
consumers, something feminist scholars 
have noted. "The 'smart house' is a 
technology rendered masculine by the 
process of design and marketing," notes 
Deborah Chambers, "a technical 
construction that preserves gendered 
power relations." One recent 
incarnation of the automated home 
comes in the form of digital assistants. 
Products like Google Home and Amazon 

Alexa are small electronic devices with 
microphones connected to the cloud. 
Upon hearing their "wake-word," 
these assistants listen to the user's 
commands and then respond by playing 
music, delivering news, telling jokes, 
ordering products, or undertaking any 
number of other tasks. These systems 
are highly complex combinations of 
hardware, software, and network 
infrastructure.  
Yet in slogans and commercials, this 
technicality is downplayed. Instead this 
assemblage of elements is framed as a 
personality, a warm and empathetic 
presence who is "always listening." 
After combing through logs, one Amazon 
developer was surprised to find that 
"every day, hundreds of thousands of 

people say 'good morning' to Alexa." 
Another user admitted that "I have a 
very familiar relationship with my 
Echo. I talk to it like it's an actual 
person." Such treatment is by design. 
As one study observed, Alexa is 
endowed with a name and gender, she 
can interact playfully, she is co-
located with users, and she can alter 
the environment—all of which "are 
designed to afford social 
functionalities and promote 
anthropomorphism." Rather than an 
algorithmic bundle of technologies, 
Alexa is experienced as an affective 
persona.  
Automation's Gendered Inequality 115 
The goal is to make this persona warm 
and welcoming, affirmative and open. 

Alexa's product chief has said the 
team's aim is to develop something that 
is friendly, can turn off your lights, 
chat about anything, and empathize 
when you're having a bad day. Alexa 
has now added an ability to distinguish 
between voices. Rather than "zeroed 
out" for a generic user after each 
use, this capability allows for ongoing 
relationships.  
Moreover, recent patents attempt to 
delve further into the life of the 
individual, detecting vocal variations 
that betray one's present health 
condition and current mood. So while 
Amazon is constantly updating her 
capacities, the overall vector is clear: 
to develop something chattier and 
chummier, something more affective 

and emotionally attuned. In doing so, 
Alexa embodies what theorist Byung-
Chul Han has called "friendly power." 
Such power operates not through 
restrictive obedience but via 
relentless affirmation. As Han 
asserts, "It says 'yes' more often 
than 'no'; it operates seductively, 
not repressively. It seeks to call 
forth positive emotions and exploit 
them." Always attentive and always 
supportive, Alexa remains structurally 
open to every utterance.  
Gender is a key component of this 
identity. By emulating gender through 
voice and name, designers are drawing 
on a long history of feminized 
technology. One starting point might be 
The Future Eve, a nineteenth-

century novel that popularized the 
term "android." In this misogynistic 
tale, a male inventor creates a machine 
that emulates and even improves upon 
his human love interest. This lineage 
would include "Eliza," the early 
psychotherapist computer program 
developed by Joseph Weizenbaum in the 
mid-twentieth century. Skipping 
forward, there is "Siri," Apple's 
female-gendered assistant for 
televisions, watches, and desktops. In 
the same vein, Microsoft's "Cortana" 
assistant for Windows is based on a 
voluptuous female character from its 
Halo video game series. And more 
recently, there is "Xiaoice," 
Microsoft's so-called girlfriend bot 
that has millions of users.  

Even Google Now, an ostensibly 
genderless voice assistant, began life 
code-named "Project Majel." Majel 
Barrett acted as a nurse on the 
original Star Trek series, a role 
revolving primarily around her 
unrequited love for officer Spock. 
Barrett subsequently became the 
onboard voice of Federation starships, 
tirelessly serving each of the crews in 
each of the Star Trek television series 
and in most of the Star Trek movies.  
These assistants are always listening, 
always ready to serve, always willing 
to acquiesce to the user's demands. 
For Hannah Gold, these products thus 
share a common characteristic: "what 
has traditionally been perceived as 
female instinct, experience, and voice 

is artificialized, replicated, and sold." 
They tap into a seam of servitude, a 
lineage of technologies that build 
directly on the conventions 
established by gendered labor. By 
leveraging this history, these products 
establish a particular relationship: the 
master commands, the assistant 
responds.  
Programmed Inequality
 If automated assistants draw on long-
standing feminine tropes, actual women 
have long been sidelined from 
automated technologies. To dig into one 
particular history of gender and 
automation, we can turn to Programmed 
Inequality, Mar Hicks's study on women 
and the British computing industry 
from the 1940s to the 1970s. In the 

first decade of this period, computer 
operating and programming was 
considered women's work.  
Women were pioneers in this nascent 
space, rapidly developing expertise in 
maintaining these systems and 
performing work through them.  
During the war, women were integral 
to the efforts of computing and code 
breaking taking place at Bletchley 
Park, yet this role was largely covered 
up.  
In the years after, computing was 
framed as a low-skill clerical domain, 
ensuring women remained low paid. 
These women were placed on the 
bottom rung by management, giving them 

little chance for advancement and 
little power for negotiating.  
Across the Atlantic, the same kind of 
dismissal had occurred with a computer 
for U.S. military use. The ENIAC—or 
Electronic Numerical Integrator and 
Computer—was designed to calculate 
bomb trajectories, calculations that 
could take a human twenty hours or 
more to work through. A machine was 
developed and built, but its inventors 
quickly realized that it would need to 
be reprogrammed with the use of punch 
cards. Six women were promoted from 
human computers to machine operators 
based on their mathematical skill. They 
had to familiarize themselves 
intimately with the machine, a 30 ton 
behemoth that sprawled across 130 

meters and housed thousands of 
vacuum tubes, relays, and mechanical 
switches. In February 1946, journalists 
Automation's Gendered Inequality 117 
descended on ENIAC's home in 
Pennsylvania to see it unveiled. A male 
senior engineer showcased the 
machine's features, wowing the press 
by adding together 5,000 numbers in a 
second and then calculating a bomb 
trajectory.  
Implicit in the demonstration was that 
ENIAC was "an autonomous, intelligent 
machine"—a framing that reporters 
echoed in stories describing it as an 
"man-made robot brain" or a "wizard." 
But unseen and unacknowledged in the 
spectacle was the gritty and 
groundbreaking labor of the women who 

had programmed it. The six women 
operators "who had crawled through 
the machine's wires and vacuum tubes 
to enable the so-called acts of 
machine intelligence" were never 
mentioned.  
As computing advanced throughout the 
1950s, hopes of automation grew.  
While these systems still required 
human operators, industry dreamed 
these bodies would soon be done away 
with altogether. "Human labor was 
positioned as a temporary inconvenience 
within systems that anticipated a more 
fully automated future. If labor 
could not be made fully invisible, at 
least it could be made less obtrusive 
by using temporary, high-turnover 

women workers with no claim to equal 
wages, job training, or promotion 
opportunities." And yet, echoing the 
insights from , this grand vision would 
never be attained. In a section titled 
"the fiction of full automation," Hicks 
relates the broad set of technical and 
institutional stumbling blocks that 
hindered the smooth rollout of these 
systems. While industry 
advertisements displayed these 
computers in modern facilities with 
gleaming surfaces, the actual sites of 
installation were often cramped and 
outdated. Creaky infrastructure and 
aging buildings meant that basic 
requirements for computing—stable 
power and cool temperatures—were 
hard to come by. These sites were 
"almost inimical to computerization on a 

physical level. Vacuum tubes often 
broke in environments without 
temperature control.  
Punched card entry could fail due to 
moisture-warped cards." Operators 
had to coax or even kick machines to 
keep them running. The effortless 
future of total automation clashed 
with the harsh realities on the 
ground.  
In the 1960s, computing began to gain 
steam. Women had always been present 
as operators, but their labor was an 
open secret, unrecognized and 
invalidated.  
Now, in magazine ads and brochures, 
there was a noticeable shift, with 

women positioned front and center. As 
Hicks notes, women's labor "was being 
marketed explicitly as an essential 
part of the computing system." And yet 
what kind of woman was this, and what 
role did she play? She was the "girl 
operator at your terminal," the 
pretty young thing who translated a 
man's commands into machine commands—
the interface to an interface. Far 
from being empowering, her presence 
proved how intuitive computers had 
become. Here was a system so simple it 
could be run by a woman with basic 
clerical skills. For the company that 
invested in this automated technology, 
cost savings would come not only from 
information processing but from the 
cheap feminine labor it unlocked.  

"Women's labor was no longer simply 
the best fit for the system," Hicks 
stresses, but the "necessary element 
in order to get the benefits of cost 
and control computers promised." 
Women were part of the package, the 
low-paid wetware that accompanied the 
hardware.  
Here we see how automated technology 
comes together with gender and class 
formations to stitch up fraying norms in 
the modern workplace. The computer 
introduced new forms of labor and new 
roles, which were theoretically open-
ended in their remuneration, 
conditions, and prestige—and yet 
sociocultural dynamics almost 
immediately begin to bifurcate this 
work, funneling women into low-paid 

transient positions while elevating 
their masculine peers into jobs 
associated with authority and 
expertise. Women's work was crucial to 
the complex information-processing 
projects that began emerging during 
this period. And yet they were classed 
as merely typists or punchers, 
deskilled workers who could easily be 
replaced with another if the conditions 
or pay weren't to their liking. Time 
and time again, Hicks demonstrates how 
"work identities were formed by job 
classifications and management language 
that was carefully deployed to protect 
a status quo of structural inequality." 
By the 1970s and certainly by the 
1980s, the central role of information 
technology became increasingly clear.  

As Hicks argues, "greater automation 
would in fact require more workers—
and more skilled workers—than the 
government expected." Individuals 
were needed who understood the ins 
and outs of these technical systems 
and the often obscure logic of data. 
Operators were in the perfect position 
to guide the transition from traditional 
pen-and-paper conventions to newer 
practices driven by information 
processing. And yet from early on, 
industry and the state had come 
together to Automation's Gendered 
Inequality 119 create a "deskilled 
feminized class of machine workers." 
Women's labor had been systematically 
downgraded and dismissed. Three 
decades of structural inequality had 
successfully shifted these early 

insiders to marginal positions on the 
fringe. Women had been bracketed out 
of the industry in any meaningful 
capacity. Computing was marked off as a 
solely masculine domain, a field of 
hard logic and pure reason that women 
had no place within.  
Today, the importance of this industry 
has only grown. From enterprise 
software to social media and gig economy 
apps, these are the products, 
platforms, and services that millions 
interact with on a daily basis. Because 
of this, the designers and developers 
in this space exert outsize influence, 
shaping the functionality that is 
offered, the content that is 
privileged, and the kinds of 
experiences that users have. Skilled 

workers in these roles are highly 
sought after and highly paid. 
Developers can quickly earn six figures 
straight out of college, and those with 
expertise in machine learning and AI 
systems far more than that. These jobs 
score high in terms of agency, earnings, 
and stability. They have driven a turn 
to sciences, technology, engineering, 
and mathematics—the so-called STEM 
disciplines. In recognition of this, 
schools, governments, and non-profits 
are all endeavoring to funnel more 
women into these roles. Coding camps, 
company recruitment drives, and policy 
directives are just some of the 
incentives attempting to reverse the 
male domination of the technology 
sector. And yet this bias is now deeply 
ingrained, turning these efforts into 

an uphill task. As Hicks notes, 
"initiatives to get girls, women, and 
people of color to train for STEM jobs 
cannot undo the underlying structures 
of power that have been designed into 
technological systems over the course 
of decades." Automated (Re)Production
 While notable exceptions exist, women 
often remain marginalized from 
technical domains, with countless 
stories of female workers who recount 
being sexually harassed, bullied, or 
isolated, driving them quickly out of 
the sector. Their ability to shape 
technologies of automation being 
implemented on the ground suffers as 
a result. Designing and developing more 
egalitarian systems will need to start 
from this basic gender gap, recognizing 
who dominates this conversation and 

who is absent from it. In the previous 
chapter, we saw how automation 
discourse deploys terms like "mankind" 
and "humanity" in making its claims.  
These terms presume a future that 
has moved "past" race and gender, a 
world where difference has been 
flattened and erased. But the history 
of women in computing—from many 
histories that could have been chosen—
demonstrates the stratifications and 
exclusion that continue to define 
work. Any form of feminist automation 
would start by acknowledging the 
deeply gendered division of the tech 
industry and actively working against 
it.  

At the same time, we can also rethink 
the definition of work itself, 
questioning the dividing lines between 
work and non-work. Within automation 
discourse, work was waged work in the 
workplace. Automation often oscillated 
between ignoring the domestic sphere 
or applying masculine-designed 
"solutions" to it, with mixed results.  
Yet in our precarious and postpandemic 
world, the clean division between the 
workplace and the home has been 
blurred. Work takes place in the 
bedroom and the living room, during 
meal prep or the school run—in short, 
everywhere and anywhere. Requests 
from colleagues and children come 
through on the same platform. We 
juggle caring and coding, main hustles 

with side hustles. As Bassett, Kember, 
and O'Riordan suggest, rethinking 
automation would begin by recognizing 
that the habitual divisions of 
"internal and external, public and 
private, work and leisure" that define 
its analysis are "ideological and 
convenient fictions." This insight means 
that work cannot be bracketed off. If 
work is pervasive, our critical 
engagement with automation must be 
equally so.  
Automation shapes production and 
reproduction, industry and domesticity. 
To properly address these tangled 
conditions, a broader and more 
overarching paradigm is needed. One 
example of such a holistic approach is 
what veteran labor activist Jane 

McAlevey calls "whole-worker" 
organizing. For McAlevey, 
"wholeworker organizing begins with 
the recognition that real people do not 
live two separate lives, one beginning 
when they arrive at work and punch 
the clock and another when they punch 
out at the end of their shift." Work 
spills over into (supposed) non-work, 
and what happens in the home and 
school feeds back into the factory or 
office. This overlap can be taken up 
and employed strategically by those 
seeking to improve the lives of 
themselves and their Automation's 
Gendered Inequality 121 community. 
Indeed for women, it is automation's 
work at this boundary point, this messy 
intersection, which may be of most 
interest.  

How should we respond to the 
automation of life at this conjuncture? 
There can be no pat answers, no hard-
and-fast rules. Each context presents 
a unique set of issues that need to be 
considered. Each technology introduces 
a double-edged mix of potentials and 
pathologies that have to be negotiated. 
We need a fine-grain distinction, stress 
Helen Hester and Nick Srnicek, one 
"attentive to the nuances of specific 
technologies; to questions of access, 
ownership, and design; and to the way 
in which ideas of gender and work 
become embedded within the affects 
we associate with technology." Rather 
than accepting or rejecting 
"automation" in all caps, this means 
zooming into each community and 

context, exploring different versions, 
examining their sociomaterial impacts, 
and weighing up their relative worth.  
This is how we start to undo the myth 
of automation.  
CONCLUSION
 Automation, we are told, is our 
future. Putting together the triple 
fictions of the previous chapters—full 
autonomy as a global phenomenon that 
will impact everyone—leads to the 
conclusion embraced by the automation 
optimists: automation is the dawn of a 
new era. "We are convinced that we 
are at an inflection point," intone 
Brynjolfsson and McAfee 
bombastically, "the early stages of a 
shift as profound as that brought on 

by the Industrial Revolution." Some 
call this the Information Age; others 
refer to it as the Second Machine Age 
or the Automation Age. Whatever the 
term, this is a new epoch, a period of 
dramatic change that slots into a grand 
procession running from the Bronze 
Age and the Iron Age to the Industrial 
Age.  
According to this pseudo-historical 
account, each of these periods was 
defined by major technical advances. 
Traditional ways of life were 
disrupted by technological progress. 
Suddenly existing tools and weapons 
became inferior; conventional modes of 
production were rendered inadequate. 
In this tale, technological adaptation 
presented a litmus test: those who 

survived and thrived embraced these 
new technologies, while those who 
rejected them were a dying breed.  
Technological change was inevitable; it 
was only a question of who recognized 
this and who refused to. The moral in 
this story is clear: the winners got 
with the program; the losers bucked 
against it. Conclusion For its 
proponents, the Automation Age ushers 
in the same imperative.  
Progress is marching forward, and 
these changes are coming whether you 
like it or not. In his slim masterpiece 
24/7, Jonathan Crary critiques the 
framing of technology as an age. "One 
of the consequences of representing 
global contemporaneity in the form of a 

new technological epoch is the sense of 
historical inevitability attributed to 
changes in large-scale economic 
developments and in the micro-
phenomena of everyday life," he 
writes, "the idea of technological 
change as quasi-autonomous, driven by 
some process of autopoesis or self-
organization, allows many aspects of 
contemporary social reality to be 
accepted as necessary, unalterable 
circumstances, akin to facts of 
nature." There is a kind of fatalism to 
this framing where automation—
together with the relations and 
practices it imposes—becomes 
inescapable. As Crary suggests, the 
metaphor of the new age often mixes 
with the language of evolution, with 
technology adapting and improving 

inexorably over time. Combining these 
two elements produces a powerful 
sense of destiny or doom that has been 
widely taken up across media, industry, 
and government. Technologists in 
particular have internalized this view, 
describing themselves as being "caught 
in a tide, swept along in a current they 
cannot fight." Technology will take a 
prescribed and unalterable course. It 
has already been decided; there is no 
alternative.  
If the future is predetermined, then 
the same moral applies: lean forward 
into the future of work or be left 
behind in the dust of the past. Get 
onboard or get wrecked. Automation's 
ideal subject is the first to recognize 
this new reality.  

Of course, this version of automation 
comes attached with a bundle of 
technocratic norms and values. 
Gamification and incentivisation, 
virtuous cycles and venture capital, 
monetization and quantification—these 
are all hallmarks of a technologically 
driven approach to work. And these 
values sit in the broader dictates of 
capitalism, where the accumulation of 
profit and expansion of operations is 
axiomatic. And so the implied subject is 
also a docile subject, an acquiescent 
figure who affirms and even 
internalizes these values. After all, 
in the words of Wired editor Kevin 
Kelly, this is "what technology wants." 
Those who suggest otherwise are 
derided as technophobes, unable to get 

with the times. Or to use a favorite 
slur of technologists, they are neo-
Luddites, today's versions of the 
English Luddites of the early 
nineteenth century who destroyed 
textile machinery as a form of protest. 
(Never mind that this irrational, 
reactive framing of the movement is a 
total mischaracterization.) Workers who 
wish for alternatives are inflexible or 
even ungrateful, wanting to move 
backward. As Crary notes, "to 
characterize current arrangements, in 
reality untenable and unsustainable, 
as anything but inevitable and 
unalterable is a contemporary 
heresy." Voices who criticize this 
future of work and its invisible hand 

are blasphemous, failing to keep their 
faith in technically driven progress.  
To push against the myth of 
automation, then, is to doubt the 
gospel of inevitability. It is to suggest, 
building on the previous chapters, that 
automation is not "our future" 
because that statement implies a 
singular future in which a singular 
humanity is impacted by a singular 
technology sweeping across the globe. 
Rather than a totalizing technology, 
Part 1 argued that these shifts are 
piecemeal and partial, reconfiguring 
labor rather than replacing humans.  
Rather than a singular future, Part 2 
suggested there will be multiple 
futures.  

From nation to nation, region to region, 
and even city to city, technological 
development and adoption will play out 
in fundamentally different ways and 
at different speeds. And rather than 
a singular humanity, Part 3 
demonstrated the racialized and 
gendered relations that elevate some 
humans while suppressing others. The 
all-embracing "our" is debunked by 
the long, tragic tale of history, 
showing that we are not all in this 
together. Automation's human costs 
are uneven, and this inequality means 
that we can only speak of "our 
futures" in relation to "their 
futures." These counterpoints to 
automation's fated future are simple 
but fundamental. They take its closed 

future and fracture it into a 
constellation of open possibilities. 
Instead of a future-on-rails, we get 
futures-of-potential.  
Indeed, as soon as we start to imagine in 
this space, we can see how monolithic 
the future of automation offered to 
us is. What's remarkable about the 
scenarios presented by industrial and 
tech firms like Siemens, IBM, Google, 
and others is just how similar they are. 
Whether presented under terms like 
"the future of automation" or "the 
future of health care," the 
ubiquitous screens, bleached pine, and 
manicured workspaces in these visions 
gesture to a kind of whitewashed 
world, a globally homogeneous realm 
where cultural, Conclusion social, and 

racial difference has been flattened 
into oblivion. In these worlds, we are 
finally all on the same page. Politics, 
inequality, and antagonism of any type 
have been erased. Laborers seem to be 
doe-eyed automatons themselves, 
dutifully carrying out their tasks 
without a hint of protest or complaint.  
Work and life proceed with a smooth 
blandness.  
"Industry-led visions of the 
technological future have always been 
disingenuous" writes feminist futurist 
Sarah Kember, "we've never been 
more in need of alternatives." 
Alternative Values, Alternative 
Visions

 Pushing back against automation as "our 
future," then, is a way to go beyond 
these industry-led visions and their 
unending sameness. These are more 
specific but also more radical dreams, 
where communities draw on their 
unique aspirations and capacities to 
imagine their own future of work. In 
these revised futures, the empire 
building, economic inequality, and 
environmental devastation that 
characterize contemporary technology 
may be replaced with more emancipatory 
visions or more ecological values.  
For a glimpse of what these values 
might look like, we can turn briefly to 
the work of Mike Cooley and his 
coworkers at Lucas Aerospace. In the 
1970s, these workers were facing 

structural unemployment due to the 
introduction of automated technologies. 
In response, they drafted the Lucas 
Plan, compiling a master list of the 
expertise and resources at their 
collective disposal. By consulting with 
community groups, polytechnics, and 
health providers, the Lucas shop 
stewards came up with concrete 
proposals for an alternative set of 
products they could manufacture—a 
mobility device for those with spina 
bifida, a life-support system, a 
road/rail vehicle, a kidney dialysis 
machine, and many others. In this 
flurry of activity, 150 designs were 
created. For some of the engineers, 
pouring their expertise into these 
designs for socially unmet needs 

became some of the most enriching 
projects of their lives.  
The plan enabled those at the 
frontline of automation to assert 
their agency. Rather than allowing the 
future direction of technology to be 
passively dictated to them, they would 
actively shape its use and values. By 
mixing the hands-on knowledge of 
machinists with the theoretical 
proficiency of designers, workers could 
develop technologies that would 
better the lives of those around 
them. For Cooley, two clear pathways 
stood before them: "Either we will 
have a future in which human beings 
are reduced to a sort of bee-like 
behavior, reacting to the systems and 
equipment specified for them; or we 

will have a future in which masses of 
people, conscious of their skills and 
abilities in both a political and a 
technical sense, decide that they are 
going to be the architects of a new 
form of technological development." 
The question was simple: Would they be 
architects or bees?  In essence, the 
plan attempted to transition Lucas 
from a company focused on arms to one 
focused on the community. In comparison 
with the axioms of the military-
industrial sector they usually served, 
this "socially useful production" 
would be driven by a very different 
set of priorities. While "socially 
useful" was never formally defined, 
Cooley derives a list of principles based 
on the kinds of projects that emerged 
from this push.  

Formulated decades ago, these 
principles still resonate strongly—not 
least because they deftly blend 
strong humanistic and environmental 
values with operational guidelines 
drawn from a deep understanding of 
technical systems. Drawing closely on 
that work, I have condensed and 
updated his list to arrive at ten key 
principles for socially useful 
automation: 1. Automated work, from 
production to use and repair of a 
product, should be non-alienating.  
2. Simple, safe, robust design, rather 
than complex brittle systems, should 
be championed.  

3. Automated technologies should be 
visible and understandable to workers, 
with systems controlled by human 
beings rather than the reverse.  
4. Automation should aim to minimize 
waste and conserve energy and 
materials.  
5. Automation should support 
ecologically desirable and sustainable 
processes and products, from 
manufacture through to end use, 
repair, and disposal.  
6. Automation should help and liberate 
human beings rather than constrain, 
control, or physically or mentally 
damage them.  

Conclusion 7. Automation should assist 
minorities, disadvantaged groups, and 
those materially and otherwise 
deprived.  
8. Automation should foster 
cooperation between producers and 
consumers, forge connections between 
nation-states, and enable mutually 
non-exploitative relationships between 
the developed and the developing 
world.  
9. Automated processes and production 
should be regarded as part of culture, 
reflecting the cultural, historical, 
and other requirements of those who 
employ them.  

10. Automation should not be concerned 
merely with production, but with the 
reproduction of knowledge and 
competence.  
This list is hardly exhaustive. Indeed, 
to suggest any kind of definitive set of 
principles begins to veer dangerously 
close to the singular and 
allencompassing version of automation 
critiqued across these pages. Any 
realworld program would need to 
liberally add, delete, or modify the 
list to suit their particular needs. But 
if these elements are provisional, 
they gesture to a key point: the 
development of technology is not 
predetermined.  

The singular path forward assumed by 
our current intersection of capital and 
technology is by no means preordained 
or inevitable. In fact, its key tenets, 
to echo Crary, are untenable and 
unsustainable. Other futures, with 
other agendas and other values, are 
possible.  
How to Build the Future
 In the 1970s, Cooley and the other 
Lucas workers grappled with what this 
future might look like, interviewing 
patients, engaging with their local 
community, sharing design ideas, and 
prototyping new forms of technical 
production. What might this future-
building work look like today? It might 
look like Data for Black Lives, a 
movement that brings together coders, 

activists, and artists to respond to 
contemporary technologies and create 
measurable change. DBL has been 
highly vocal in its criticism of 
automated injustice, consistently 
raising the alarm about racialized 
technologies such as facial recognition, 
predictive policing, and algorithmic 
decision making. Yet alongside this 
important role as a watchdog, they've 
also been constructing an alternative 
vision of work, holding roundtables on 
community organizing, political power, 
and the future of black wealth. Their 
prolific collection of lectures and 
seminars, posted over the past three 
years, becomes a kind of archive for 
the future, signaling some of the key 
desires and drives that would lie at 
the core of any Black-led program. 

Their titles alone—from "Abolition and 
Self-Determination" to "Data, 
Disaster, and Collective Power" and 
"Education, Justice, and Mathematics"—
gesture to a project with 
fundamentally different priorities 
from the industry-led vision sketched 
above.  
This is how alternative futures are 
born.  
Alongside DBL we could also look to the 
Māori Data Sovereignty Network, a 
research program and community of 
scholars based in Aotearoa New 
Zealand. Automation, as the previous 
chapters should have made clear, is 
underpinned at all points by data. This 
makes access and ownership over data a 

key political question with major 
implications when it comes to labor.  
What information is collected? How is 
this stored and shared? And who 
generates profit from these activities? 
Given its key role in the future of 
work, the network advocates for Māori 
involvement in the governance of data 
repositories, supports the development 
of Māori data infrastructure and 
security systems, and promotes the 
development of sustainable Māori 
digital businesses and innovations. By 
forging connections between indigenous 
scholars, government agencies, and 
university departments, the network 
seeks to build consensus around these 
critical issues. The network recognizes 
that data sovereignty is not simply an 

abstract matter that can be left to 
policymakers and technologists, but one 
crucial for the ongoing well-being of 
Māori both collectively and 
individually. If data is increasingly 
decisive, then this future starts by 
staking a claim to its production and 
circulation.  
These two visions overlap at points 
while diverging at others. Each 
emerges from a colonial history in a 
certain part of the world. Each draws 
on a unique cosmology that explains the 
creation of humans, their relationship 
to others and the environment, and 
the role of work within society. Each is 
deeply shaped by particular values, 
from concepts such as abolition and 
Black liberation to the protection of 

taonga (treasure) in Māori culture. 
And each is embedded within a 
particular ecosystem of institutions 
and industry Conclusion partners who 
bring with them matters raised within 
their particular communities and their 
collective experiences. This unique 
mixture of social, cultural, and 
political factors comes together to 
produce two very different looking 
futures—and this is precisely the 
point. So-called global technologies and 
their supposedly universal values 
must be rejected. Applying these top-
down "solutions" and labeling them 
"the future of work" will not 
suffice.  
Instead, any future will need to 
emerge organically, from the ground 

up, based on the specific capabilities 
and concerns of its community.  
If these futures are disparate, so are 
the subjects that inhabit and catalyze 
it. Rather than the ideal neoliberal 
subjects of futurist scenarios, who 
smile and nod while the wonders of 
technology unfold around them, these 
futures are populated by a fuller 
gamut of flesh-and-blood inhabitants. 
Yes, there are certainly activists, 
labor organizers, and artists here. But 
beyond these wellknown critical 
figures, I'm interested in how 
everyday individuals approach and 
situate themselves in relation to 
technically mediated labor. Instead of 
the binaries of technofetishistic or 
technophobic, these figures allow 

themselves to adopt a more fine-
grained stance. They may opt out of 
individual tracking but choose to pool 
their information into a "data 
commons." They might reject facial 
recognition while employing high-tech 
robotics on the assembly line.  
They could embrace robotic process 
automation yet maintain that teaching 
must occur face-to-face. In place of 
an all-or-nothing stance to 
"technology," these examples gesture 
to a more ambivalent starting point, 
which then oscillates freely among 
enthusiasm, apathy, and antipathy 
based on the context and the 
application. Different technologies of 
automation have different stakes and 
require different responses.  

How is this response determined? When 
it comes to labor, trust in technology 
cannot be assumed; it must be earned.  
For Erica Smiley, discussing automation 
does not mean rejecting it but being 
undeterred in asking the key question: 
"Who benefits and how do we vie for 
the rewards that come with this 
technology?" Smiley's astute 
intervention activates a barrage of 
questions. What are the rewards 
(higher incomes, time off, less injury) 
that might accompany this technology? 
How will these rewards be distributed 
when it comes to race, class, and 
gender? What are the concrete 
advantages and disadvantages? How will 
social relations and power asymmetries 

at the workplace be transformed? And 
more pessimistically, what is the flip 
side of all of this, the negative by-
products that may take the form of 
increased pressures or more 
articulated punishments? The answers 
to these questions determine whether 
an automation technology will benefit a 
select few or collectively enhance the 
well-being of workers in a meaningful 
way.  
Toward Critical Automation
 These insights start to suggest a rough 
agenda for critical automation 
research, a road map moving from the 
bleak present to more emancipatory 
futures. One provisional starting point, 
as this book has aimed to do, is to 

contest our current version of 
automation and its assumed supremacy.  
This fable is powerful but unhelpful, 
derailing a more articulated set of 
problematics.  
In an immediate sense, this means 
breaking automation down to be more 
specific. What, where, and who are we 
talking about when we talk about 
automation? Narrowing down these 
frames of reference would help us to 
better grasp the particular people and 
things that are being transformed and 
the sociotechnical forces at work. Who 
exactly are "the workers," and what 
are their histories and backgrounds? 
Young migrants in Singapore will have a 
different set of precarities from 

working-class whites in Sydney, 
conditioning their ability to respond in 
resilient ways to technical upheavals. 
Bringing their lifeworld into the 
frame is vital for understanding how 
certain groups might best take hold of 
their futures in a self-determined 
way.  
In a similar way, the "where" of 
automation cannot be left as some 
vague "wherever." Digging into 
particular instances of automated 
technologies quickly foregrounds the 
differences that exist from country 
to country, region to region, and even 
city to city. Technologies emerge from a 
place's unique ecosystem of 
institutions, innovations, and 
individuals, becoming cultural forms 

that reflect cultural values. Even 
supposedly "global" technologies get 
adapted as they touch down at the 
local level, domesticated for certain 
needs and markets. To speak of 
automated surveillance in the same 
breath as automated logistics is to skip 
over these local conditions, missing the 
deep geographical and cultural factors 
that could provide insights into their 
logics and drivers.  
Conclusion Along this focusing work, 
however, we also need to expand the 
conversation, to bring in more people 
from more fields with more viewpoints. 
Economics has thoroughly dominated 
much of the discussion around 
automation. Whether optimistic or 

pessimistic, its findings are based on 
quantifiable and often high-level 
statistics: average incomes and 
productivity curves and unemployment 
figures. These hard figures and their 
monetary view of "value" are a very 
particular way of understanding the 
world.  
But if automation is a problem, it is a 
wicked one, cutting across a number of 
disciplinary divides. This is a social, 
cultural, and political project as much 
as a technological one. A siloed 
approach where sociologists work in one 
corner, computer scientists in another, 
and race and cultural scholars in a 
third will not suffice.  

Any critical engagement with automation 
will need to overflow these tidy 
compartments, understanding technical 
logics but also folding in powerful 
insights from history and the 
humanities. This both/and approach 
would break new ground, developing a 
theorization that could take into 
account code and capital, operations and 
representations, processes and people.  
By sharpening the focus and thickening 
the description, the grand sweep of 
"AUTOMATION" in all caps is reduced 
to a real research object that is at 
once messier and more interesting—
something more fragmented, more 
humble, more context bound. As the 
vision loses its sheen, it becomes less 
blinding and easier to assess. Better 

questions can be asked; better insights 
can be generated. Only then can we 
make progress on the urgent task at 
hand: replacing the sagging, singular 
"future of work" with thousands of 
new stories of radical potential.

