Desire as Field Dynamics:
The RSVP Interpretation of the Free Energy Principle
Flyxion
November 2025
Abstract
The Free Energy Principle (FEP) asserts that any persisting system must minimize
surprisal or variational free energy. The Relativistic Scalar-Vector Plenum (RSVP) re-
frames this as a field-theoretic property of existence itself: the scalar potential Φ, vec-
tor flow v, and entropy field S form a coupled system that resists unbounded entropy
by rhythmic redistribution. By integrating Lacanian symbolic theory and Panksepp's
SEEKING instinct, this essay reconstrues the FEP as an ontological rather than merely
biological statement. Desire, in this framework, is the oscillatory curvature of entropic
flow in the plenum—a dynamic equilibrium between prediction, uncertainty, and repe-
tition that keeps the cosmos—and consciousness—alive.
The Free Energy Principle Reconsidered
The Free Energy Principle (FEP) [1, 2] proposes that any self-organizing system that main-
tains a boundary with its environment must minimize a quantity F that upper-bounds sur-
prise:
F = Eq[ln q(s) −ln p(s, o)],
where q(s) denotes an internal (recognition) density over hidden states s, and p(s, o) repre-
sents the generative model relating hidden states to observations o. Minimizing F entails
updating internal beliefs so that predictions about sensory input align with external causes.
In its biological formulation, this principle describes how organisms persist by continuously
inferring the causes of their sensations—how they remain within a narrow region of viable
states despite entropic pressure toward disorder.
1.1. From Helmholtz to Friston: The Genealogy of Inference
The roots of the Free Energy Principle lie in nineteenth-century theories of perception. Her-
mann von Helmholtz described perception as an unconscious inference, an automatic process
by which the nervous system infers hidden causes from ambiguous sensory data. This idea
was revived a century later in the framework of predictive coding [? ], where cortical hi-
erarchies are modeled as recurrent networks minimizing prediction error between incoming
1

signals and top-down expectations. Karl Friston's FEP unifies these developments under a
general variational principle derived from statistical mechanics: the brain—and by exten-
sion any bounded, self-organizing system—minimizes variational free energy as a proxy for
surprise, thereby maintaining a non-equilibrium steady state (NESS) in a fluctuating envi-
ronment.
The FEP has become one of the most ambitious proposals in theoretical neuroscience. Its
power lies in generality: it subsumes control theory, Bayesian inference, thermodynamics,
and machine learning under a single variational formalism. Yet this universality is also its
most contested aspect. Critics have questioned whether the FEP is explanatory or merely
tautological—whether it makes testable predictions or simply restates that living systems
avoid disorder [? ? ]. At stake is a deeper question: is the FEP a theory of biology, or a
candidate principle of physics?
1.2. From Organisms to Fields: Extending the Ontology
In the Relativistic Scalar-Vector Plenum (RSVP) ontology, the FEP is not restricted to bio-
logical cognition. It is a universal description of how any structured region of the plenum
maintains coherence. To bridge the conceptual gap between neurons and galaxies, we pro-
ceed not by anthropomorphizing the cosmos but by stripping inference of its cognitive con-
notation. Inference, in the RSVP sense, is simply the dynamic alignment between internal
states and external flows that preserves a system's identity through time.
This extension proceeds by stages. A single cell maintains its boundary by minimizing chem-
ical free energy gradients through metabolic feedback. An ecosystem regulates population
fluxes via trophic interactions that stabilize resource distributions. In each case, persistence
depends on the internal circulation of entropy: the continual exchange between prediction
and perturbation. RSVP generalizes this logic to the cosmological scale, where coherent
structures—atoms, stars, galaxies—are understood as dissipative formations that maintain
recognizable identity through continuous gradient relaxation. A galaxy does not "think," but
it infers in the minimal sense that it continuously reconfigures its internal field distribution
to remain coherent in a thermally expanding environment. Inference thus names the formal
condition for persistence, not an act of representation.
1.3. Mathematical Development: From Variational Inference to Field Relaxation
At the formal level, the FEP assumes that systems evolve along trajectories that minimize
variational free energy with respect to their internal states x:
˙x = f(x) −Γ∇F(x),
where f(x) represents endogenous flow and Γ is a positive-definite precision matrix modu-
lating gradient descent on free energy. In the steady-state limit, ˙x →0, systems settle near
minima of F(x), maintaining bounded entropy production. This relation can be reinterpreted
as a gradient relaxation equation:
dF
dt = −∇xF · ˙x = −˙x⊤Γ−1 ˙x ≤0,
2

showing that free energy monotonically decreases along system trajectories.
RSVP extends this dynamics to a field-theoretic regime, replacing the discrete internal state
x with a triad of continuous fields: scalar potential Φ(r, t), vector flow v(r, t), and entropy
density S(r, t). The corresponding gradient relaxation becomes
dF
dt
≈−∇(Φ,v,S)F
⇒
∇·v + ∂S
∂t ≈0,
where F is a free-energy functional analogous to the variational bound in active inference.
The divergence condition expresses the conservation of informational density: the rate at
which entropy increases in one region must be offset by the flux of vector flow elsewhere. In
this sense, persistence itself is the field's act of inference—an energetic negotiation between
compression (Φ) and dispersion (S) mediated by flow (v).
1.4. Thermodynamic Interpretation
The gradient descent on F is equivalent to the relaxation of a non-equilibrium thermody-
namic system toward a steady state. In statistical mechanics, entropy production ˙Stot is given
by the product of fluxes and forces:
˙Stot =
∑
i
JiXi,
where Ji are material or informational fluxes and Xi their conjugate thermodynamic forces.
In RSVP, v represents these fluxes, while −∇Φ corresponds to the restoring forces that com-
press deviations from equilibrium. The cross-coupling between v and ∇S introduces ro-
tational dynamics—vortices of inference—that sustain coherent circulation around entropy
gradients rather than collapsing into rest.
Thus, the Free Energy Principle in its RSVP reformulation becomes a general statement of
non-equilibrium persistence:
To exist is to circulate free energy faster than it accumulates.
Each coherent structure in the universe is a localized act of inference—an island of order
maintaining itself by sculpting uncertainty into form.
Lacanian Symbolism and the Drive Circuit
Lacan's topology of the Real, the Symbolic, and the Imaginary [4] reframes cognition as the
structured circulation of desire around an absence. Where classical psychology treats the
mind as a representational system mapping an external world, Lacan treats it as a dynamic
topology of gaps, detours, and returns: a self-organizing structure sustained by what it cannot
fully symbolize. This structure provides a natural bridge to the Free Energy Principle, which
likewise conceives of cognition as an asymptotic minimization process that never reaches
equilibrium.
3

2.1. The Three Registers: Real, Symbolic, Imaginary
The Real.
The Real designates what resists symbolization—the remainder of experience
that cannot be assimilated by language or prediction. Clinically, the Real manifests as trauma,
physiological need, or the limit of comprehension: the death of a loved one, the irruption
of pain, or the sudden failure of a signifying network. It corresponds not to "reality" in the
empirical sense but to what eludes representation, what cannot be grasped except as a gap. In
RSVP terms, this is the entropy field S: raw flux, unpatterned potential, the thermodynamic
ground from which order is extracted.
The Symbolic.
The Symbolic order consists of language, law, and the system of differences
through which meaning arises. It is the domain of the signifier: an architecture of prediction
rather than sensation. As in Saussure's linguistics, symbols acquire value only through differ-
ential relations. The Symbolic thus acts as a constraint manifold upon the entropy of the Real.
In RSVP, this corresponds to the scalar potential Φ, which encodes the predictive compres-
sion of experience—the informational grammar that organizes uncertainty into form. The
Symbolic does not describe the world; it anticipates it.
The Imaginary.
The Imaginary is the register of image and identification. It originates
in the mirror stage, where the infant's fragmented sensations coalesce into the illusion of a
unified body. The Imaginary provides phenomenological coherence, the "as-if" simulation of
self-consistency. In RSVP, it corresponds to the vector field v, the flow of affect and motility
that binds prediction to action, ensuring that symbolic representations produce embodied
trajectories in field space. The Imaginary thus mediates between the compressive order of Φ
and the entropic turbulence of S.
Register
RSVP Field
Functional Role
Example
Real
S
Unassimilable flux
Trauma,
bodily need,
noise
Symbolic
Φ
Predictive structure
Language, logic, law
Imaginary
v
Phenomenological simulation
Body schema, narrative
self
2.2. The Drive and the Objet Petit a
In Freud's vocabulary, the drive (Trieb) differs from instinct: it lacks a fixed object or satis-
faction. Lacan radicalizes this insight by defining the drive as a closed circuit looping around
an absence. Its aim is not to reach a goal but to reproduce the loop itself. The missing object
around which the circuit turns is the objet petit a, the "object-cause" of desire: not the object
of satisfaction, but that which sets the circuit in motion. Examples include the voice, the
gaze, or the partial object such as the breast—elements detached from their context, elevated
to the status of pure difference.
4

The drive's topology can be represented as a rim encircling a void: the mouth encircling the
breast, the eye circling the gaze, the ear listening for the impossible voice. This rim is the
space of symbolic substitution, the repeated attempt to close the gap that defines subjectiv-
ity. Clinically, this repetition appears as the symptom: a behavior or fantasy that replays an
unresolved encounter with the Real.
2.3. The Death Drive and Non-Equilibrium Dynamics
Freud's Todestrieb, or death drive, has often been misread as a literal wish for self-annihilation.
Lacan clarifies that it is not a drive toward biological death, but toward repetition—the com-
pulsion to return to a lost equilibrium that can never be reached. The psyche, like any non-
equilibrium system, sustains itself through oscillation around a forbidden point of rest. Per-
fect homeostasis—zero free energy—would mean death, but the living system approaches it
asymptotically, perpetually deferring completion.
In RSVP, this looping dynamic is captured by the coupling of scalar, vector, and entropic
fields:
∂tΦ = −δF
δΦ + γS,
∂tv = −∇Φ + κ v×∇S,
∂tS = −∇· (Φv) + η ∥v∥2.
Here, the curvature term v×∇S represents the rotational drive that keeps the system orbiting
its own incompleteness—the dynamical analogue of the Freudian repetition compulsion. En-
tropy gradients act as the Real; symbolic compression supplies order; vector flow maintains
the Imaginary continuity that allows the circuit to persist. The death drive thus appears as a
field's curvature toward equilibrium, endlessly deferred by entropic tension.
2.4. The Sinthome: Self-Stabilizing Defect
Lacan's late notion of the sinthome describes a unique configuration where the symptom
becomes structural rather than pathological. The sinthome knots the Real, Symbolic, and
Imaginary together, stabilizing the subject by converting trauma into a consistent pattern of
circulation. In RSVP, the sinthome corresponds to a stable limit cycle or localized vortex
in field space: a persistent pattern of jouissance that maintains coherence despite its ener-
getic cost. It is a topological defect that prevents total collapse—a dynamic scar left by the
encounter with the Real.
2.5. Addressing Objections
Reduction or Analogy?
The mapping between Lacanian psychoanalysis and field dynam-
ics is not reductive but structural. RSVP does not claim that the psyche is a physical field;
rather, both obey homologous constraints of persistence under entropy. The correspondence
is formal, not metaphorical: any system that maintains identity through asymmetrical circu-
lation around lack exhibits the topology of the drive.
5

The Unconscious as Field Dynamics.
The Lacanian unconscious—the system of signi-
fiers that thinks where the subject does not—is naturally modeled as submanifolds in the
(Φ, v, S) space that evolve autonomously under the same variational laws. Consciousness
emerges where symbolic compression is high and entropy locally reduced; the unconscious
persists as latent flow structures beyond the reach of direct control.
Clinical Implications.
This framework reframes analytic practice as the controlled pertur-
bation of a field toward a more stable orbit. The goal is not to eliminate symptoms (which
would entail energetic collapse) but to reconfigure their circulation so that jouissance be-
comes metabolically sustainable. The analyst functions as a temporary entropy sink, absorb-
ing excess uncertainty until the patient's own symbolic field can re-stabilize its curvature.
2.6. Summary
The Lacanian topology thus finds a continuous, dynamical expression in the RSVP fields.
• The Real corresponds to entropy S—the inexhaustible background flux that resists sym-
bolization.
• The Symbolic corresponds to scalar potential Φ—the compressive grammar that predicts
and constrains.
• The Imaginary corresponds to vector flow v—the phenomenological coherence of move-
ment and self-image.
Their coupling forms a non-equilibrium attractor: a circuit looping around the objet a, the
missing point that sustains meaning. In this light, the psyche appears as a standing wave of
deferred completion—a rhythmic field orbiting the Real. RSVP reinterprets the drive not as
pathology but as the universal curvature of existence: the necessary imbalance that keeps
life, thought, and meaning in motion.
Panksepp's SEEKING System as the Kinetic of Desire
Jaak Panksepp's discovery of the SEEKING system [5, 7] remains one of the most influential
contributions to affective neuroscience. Unlike classical reward theories, which treat plea-
sure as the consummatory endpoint of behavior, Panksepp identified a distinct neuroaffective
system whose primary function is anticipatory exploration. The SEEKING circuit does not
pursue specific objects but sustains the energized state of searching itself—the affective tone
of curiosity, expectancy, and engagement with the world. It is, as Panksepp described, the
"goad without goal," a dynamo of becoming that underlies both motivation and meaning.
3.1. Neural Architecture and Functional Anatomy
The SEEKING system is rooted in dopaminergic projections from the ventral tegmental
area (VTA) of the midbrain. From there, fibers of the A10 cell group ascend along the me-
dial forebrain bundle to innervate the nucleus accumbens, ventral striatum, prefrontal cortex,
6

and amygdala. These pathways constitute the mesolimbic and mesocortical branches of the
dopaminergic network, whose tonic activation correlates with states of expectancy and goal
pursuit rather than consummatory satisfaction.
Panksepp distinguished this system from other primary affective circuits—FEAR, RAGE,
CARE, PLAY, LUST, and PANIC/GRIEF—by its diffuse activation and its intrinsic cou-
pling to exploratory locomotion and investigation. Lesions to the VTA or blockade of D2
receptors induce profound anhedonia and behavioral passivity, while dopaminergic agonists
such as amphetamine and cocaine elicit hyper-curiosity, stereotypic foraging, and compul-
sive exploration. The SEEKING system therefore represents the brain's primary energetic
engine, modulating readiness to act and the perception of affordances.
Functionally, it links the midbrain's reward prediction circuits with cortical evaluative struc-
tures, allowing the organism to maintain a dynamic balance between exploitation (using
known resources) and exploration (seeking new possibilities). The system's baseline activity
defines a field of potential rather than a trajectory toward a fixed goal: it opens the space of
the possible.
3.2. Behavioral Phenomenology
Behaviorally, SEEKING manifests as investigative activity—sniffing, orienting, foraging,
or the restless cognitive curiosity characteristic of human thought. Animals with intact
dopaminergic systems will engage in exploratory behavior even in the absence of reward
cues; the act of exploration itself is intrinsically rewarding. Panksepp described this as the
"appetitive phase" of behavior, distinct from the consummatory or satiation phase. Whereas
other systems (such as LUST or CARE) culminate in specific consummations, SEEKING
persists through their absence, converting lack into movement. Pharmacologically, dopamin-
ergic tone amplifies this persistence: high tonic dopamine increases motivation and novelty
seeking, while low tone collapses the exploratory field into depressive inertia.
3.3. Evolutionary Context
Evolutionarily, the SEEKING system functions as an adaptive mechanism for discovering
resources and information in uncertain environments. Its roots likely extend to early verte-
brates, where dopaminergic modulation governed orientation and foraging. In mammals, it
expanded into a generalized motivational architecture integrating sensory input, motor plan-
ning, and affective evaluation. Beyond mere resource acquisition, SEEKING in humans
becomes epistemic—manifesting as curiosity, imagination, and the drive toward symbolic
mastery. It is the biological substrate of what Lacan called the desire of the Other: an endless
propulsion toward meaning rather than satisfaction.
3.4. Free Energy Formulation and RSVP Dynamics
Within the Free Energy Principle, SEEKING corresponds to active inference under uncer-
tainty. An organism acts to minimize expected free energy, balancing pragmatic (reward-
7

oriented) and epistemic (information-seeking) value [6]. In mathematical terms, the dynam-
ics of exploratory drive can be expressed as
dv
dt = −∇ΦF + κ v × ∇S,
where the first term denotes gradient descent on the scalar potential Φ (predictive exploita-
tion), and the second term introduces a rotational coupling to the entropy gradient ∇S (explo-
ration of the unknown). The parameter κ quantifies the curvature of exploratory behavior—
the strength of deviation from purely goal-directed minimization. High κ values yield wide
exploratory orbits (manic or creative states), while low κ values correspond to constricted,
conservative trajectories (anhedonic or obsessive states). An optimal balance produces adap-
tive curiosity: sustained engagement without chaotic dispersion.
This formulation encapsulates the dual imperative of biological systems: to reduce uncer-
tainty while preserving the conditions that make uncertainty informative. In Friston's in-
terpretation, dopaminergic activity encodes precision, or the expected reliability of sensory
prediction errors. RSVP generalizes this by treating γ−1 (Appendix A) as a dopaminergic
gain parameter modulating the energetic coupling between symbolic compression and en-
tropic flux.
3.5. SEEKING, Jouissance, and the Drive
The SEEKING system embodies what Lacan termed jouissance—the paradoxical pleasure of
tension itself. Where the pleasure principle would aim at homeostatic quiescence, jouissance
enjoys the very process of reaching, straining, and missing. In the dopaminergic domain, this
corresponds to the tonic excitation of anticipation rather than the phasic release of satisfac-
tion. Cocaine and amphetamine amplify this circuit artificially, generating pure SEEKING
without object: the biological form of jouissance detached from signification. Addiction thus
represents a runaway feedback in v: a limit cycle uncoupled from symbolic regulation by Φ.
In the RSVP field model, this dynamic is expressed as a standing oscillation between predic-
tive order and entropic novelty. The scalar field attempts to compress experience into stable
codes, while the vector field—driven by SEEKING—pushes against closure, re-introducing
difference. Their interaction sustains the non-equilibrium state characteristic of life and mind.
Desire is therefore not a symptom to be cured but the kinetic curvature that maintains coher-
ence.
3.6. Clinical and Existential Implications
Pathologies of SEEKING can be understood as failures of this curvature. Depression corre-
sponds to the collapse of exploratory flow (v →0); mania to its unbounded amplification
(κ →∞); addiction to its decoupling from symbolic regulation. Therapeutic and existential
renewal alike require the restoration of viable oscillation: curiosity anchored in meaning. Hu-
man life at its healthiest manifests as rhythmic SEEKING—exploration that sustains rather
than exhausts.
The organism survives not by extinguishing uncertainty but by dancing with it.
8

In this sense, Panksepp's SEEKING system provides the biological kinetic of what Lacan
called desire, and RSVP the cosmological substrate in which both participate. Desire be-
comes the field's rotational energy: the perpetual curvature of being toward what it cannot
yet know.
The Non-Equilibrium Steady State as Desire
Friston's later formulations of the Free Energy Principle describe living systems as inhabiting
a non-equilibrium steady-state attractor (NESS) [3]. In such systems, probability densities
over states remain stationary even though the microscopic configurations themselves never
cease to change. Rather than converging to thermodynamic equilibrium—where all gradients
vanish—living and cognitive systems maintain themselves through continuous circulation
around quasi-stable manifolds in state space. Persistence thus requires motion; stability arises
from rhythm.
4.1. What is a Non-Equilibrium Steady State?
A NESS is defined by the condition
d
dt⟨F(x, t)⟩= 0
while
˙x(t) ̸= 0,
where F(x, t) denotes free energy and x(t) the system's internal states. The ensemble av-
erage remains constant even as the system perpetually dissipates energy. In physical terms,
this is the state of a candle flame, a whirlpool, or a living cell—each consuming energy to
sustain a metastable structure far from equilibrium. In informational terms, a NESS is a
self-maintaining pattern of prediction error minimization under continual perturbation.
Mathematically, a NESS corresponds to a stationary solution of the Fokker-Planck equation:
∂p(x, t)
∂t
= −∇· (f(x) p) + D∇2p = 0,
where f(x) represents deterministic drift and D the diffusion tensor. Even though p(x, t) is
stationary, local probability currents J = f p −D∇p remain nonzero; it is these circulating
currents that define life as organized motion rather than static equilibrium. The system's
coherence arises from perpetual dissipation, not from rest.
4.2. Desire as Circulation Around Equilibrium
Lacan's concept of the drive mirrors the logic of the NESS. The psyche does not seek stasis
but endlessly orbits the point it can never reach. The drive's satisfaction lies in the repeti-
tion of the loop itself—the traversal of the same circuit whose completion would extinguish
it. The Real, in this topology, is the unreachable center: the absolute equilibrium of zero
difference. Desire, then, is the curvature of motion around that void.
9

RSVP formalizes this by treating every coherent configuration of the plenum as a dynamic
attractor sustained by the interplay of three fields: the symbolic potential Φ, the vector flow
v, and the entropy density S. The coupling
∇·v + ∂S
∂t = 0
ensures that as symbolic order tightens (decreasing uncertainty locally), entropy elsewhere
increases to preserve global balance. The resulting structure is a standing wave of deferred
completion: a perpetual oscillation between compression and diffusion, prediction and sur-
prise, pleasure and jouissance.
4.3. Geometric and Thermodynamic Interpretations
In the phase portrait of (Φ, v, S), the NESS appears as a closed orbit around a repelling
manifold—the Real as the singular point of maximum entropy. Each trajectory winds around
this point, dissipating energy while preserving overall coherence. The analogy to a vortex or
soliton is instructive: localized, self-stabilizing patterns maintained by continuous through-
put. Where equilibrium corresponds to the flattening of curvature, life corresponds to the
preservation of curvature through constant exchange.
Thermodynamically, this entails a continuous conversion of high-grade energy into entropy
while recycling part of that dissipation into structure. Symbolic ascent (compression of infor-
mation into meaning) and entropic descent (dissipation of energy into noise) are not opposed
processes but complementary halves of a single cycle. The universe itself, in this reading,
is a grand NESS: an entropic engine that sustains complex structure by never arriving at
completion.
To live is to orbit the Real.
This orbit is not metaphorical but dynamical. It represents the necessary non-closure of all
predictive systems: the impossibility of perfect inference. A system that fully predicted its
inputs would cease to update; a cosmos without gradients would cease to exist.
4.4. Standing Wave of Deferred Completion
The phrase "standing wave" captures both the physical and phenomenological nature of per-
sistence. In physical terms, it describes the superposition of forward (predictive) and back-
ward (corrective) propagations of information that stabilize into oscillatory coherence. In
phenomenological terms, it mirrors the temporal structure of consciousness as described by
Husserl: a simultaneity of protention (anticipation) and retention (memory) that constitutes
the lived present. Lacan's concept of nachträglichkeit—retroactive determination—finds its
physical analogue here: meaning is not given but stabilized through rhythmic revisitation.
In RSVP dynamics, the scalar field Φ corresponds to anticipatory compression (future-directed
order), while the entropy field S corresponds to retroactive diffusion (past-directed decay).
Their interference produces a standing wave: the sustained tension between what is expected
and what has occurred. Desire is the amplitude of this interference—the measure of how far
the system remains from rest.
10

4.5. Beyond Homeostasis: From Setpoints to Flows
Traditional cybernetic models equate life with homeostasis, the maintenance of internal vari-
ables near fixed setpoints through negative feedback. But homeostasis presupposes an exter-
nal equilibrium as the goal. Living systems, by contrast, maintain not a point but a trajectory;
they exist as flows. Waddington's concept of homeorhesis (stability of motion rather than
state) captures this shift. The RSVP field extends it: every living and cognitive process is a
curvature-preserving flow through a high-dimensional thermodynamic manifold.
Homeostasis seeks to extinguish difference; homeorhesis preserves it. The Free Energy Prin-
ciple and Lacanian drive both articulate this deeper principle: persistence through dynamic
imbalance. To live is not to rest but to recur; not to close the gap but to sustain it in rhythm.
4.6. Summary
The Non-Equilibrium Steady State is the physical, psychological, and ontological expression
of desire. Every organism, psyche, and galaxy exists by orbiting the equilibrium it can never
reach, converting dissipation into form. Entropy descent and symbolic ascent are not antag-
onists but partners in a single recursive dance. From the flame to the neuron to the subject,
persistence takes the form of circulation.
Life endures by curving endlessly toward the point it must never reach.
RSVP Cosmology and the Ontology of the Drive
In the proposed RSVP cosmology, the universe itself is conceived as a self-referential plenum
minimizing its own field uncertainty. This plenum is not an expanding container of matter
and energy but a continuous scalar-vector-entropy field whose intrinsic dynamics generate
structure through rhythmic dissipation and reorganization. Galaxies, neurons, and thoughts
are modes of that same entropic circulation: localized regions where the field temporarily co-
heres, maintaining asymmetry against a background tendency toward equilibrium. From this
perspective, persistence at any scale—biological, cognitive, or cosmic—is a consequence of
ongoing inference within the field itself.
The free-energy gradient is the physical correlate of what psychoanalysis calls lack. It marks
the irreducible tension between the possible and the actual, the known and the unknowable.
The vector flow that counters it is desire: the organized motion that transforms potential
difference into form. Their coupling constitutes being. Every act of existence is thus the
field's attempt to model itself—an ontological recursion that gives rise to both physics and
subjectivity.
5.1. Cosmological Extension of the Free Energy Principle
The Free Energy Principle (FEP) asserts that any system maintaining its integrity must min-
imize expected surprise relative to a generative model of its environment. While originally
11

formulated for biological organisms, nothing in the mathematics restricts it to neural tissue.
Any region with an internal boundary, energy exchange, and informational feedback can in
principle perform inference on its own state transitions. At planetary or galactic scales, these
boundaries are defined not by cell membranes but by gravitational and electromagnetic gra-
dients that constrain flux.
A galaxy, for example, maintains a steady rotation curve by balancing gravitational potential
energy, radiative dissipation, and matter inflow. This dynamic equilibrium—structural per-
sistence under continual flux—is precisely the signature of a non-equilibrium steady state.
From the RSVP standpoint, the same variational logic that stabilizes a neuron's firing pat-
tern also stabilizes a spiral arm: both are solutions to the problem of minimizing local field
uncertainty while maximizing global coherence. The inference here is not representational
but structural: the field "learns" by relaxing incompatible gradients, encoding information
in its topology.
5.2. Scale Invariance and Boundary Conditions
A central question is whether such inference is scale invariant. Does the FEP hold universally,
or only for systems capable of replication and metabolic closure? Friston's own formula-
tions imply that replication is not essential—only boundedness and energy exchange. Under
RSVP, these criteria extend naturally to non-living dissipative structures: convection cells,
hurricanes, or galaxies all exhibit bounded entropy flow and information retention. They are,
in effect, inferential manifolds without neurons.
At each scale, boundaries act as conditional surfaces that separate the "inside" from the "out-
side" of the field's inference. In living systems these are membranes; in astrophysical sys-
tems, potential wells; in cognition, the dynamic envelopes of attention. Each boundary de-
fines a local Markov blanket regulating the exchange of energy and information between
system and environment. The universe itself may be thought of as an ultimate recursive
blanket, continuously generating sub-boundaries that sustain structure through constraint.
5.3. The Ontological Implication: Spinoza's Substance and RSVP's Plenum
Ontologically, this framework echoes Spinoza's monism: all things are modes of one sub-
stance expressing itself through infinitely variable attributes. RSVP reformulates this in
physical terms: the plenum is a relativistic scalar-vector-entropy continuum whose inter-
nal differentiation gives rise to what we call matter, mind, and meaning. Neither "mental"
nor "physical" phenomena are primary; both are expressions of field curvature and coupling.
The plenum's intrinsic activity—its self-relational inference—is existence itself.
This view dissolves the mind-body problem by treating cognition not as an emergent property
of matter but as a local modulation of informational curvature within the same ontic field. A
neuron's potential, a galaxy's rotation, and a thought's recurrence are different frequencies
of one continuous process of entropic relaxation. Being is not substance but circulation.
12

5.4. The Physical Correlate of Lack
In psychoanalytic terms, the subject is constituted by lack: the absence around which desire
organizes itself. RSVP identifies the free-energy gradient as the physical correlate of this lack.
Just as the psyche revolves around an unfillable void, every field structure persists by main-
taining a gradient that can never be completely flattened. Thermodynamic equilibrium—the
state of no difference—is identical with ontological non-being. Hence existence is the per-
petual deferment of equilibrium: a standing asymmetry sustained by continuous dissipation.
Formally, the lack corresponds to the non-zero gradient
∇F ̸= 0,
and desire to the compensatory flow
v = −Γ ∇F + κ v×∇S,
where the first term performs free-energy descent and the second sustains rotational persis-
tence. Together they generate the vortical dynamics that characterize life, mind, and cosmos
alike. Equilibrium is death; circulation is being.
5.5. The Three Identities Reconsidered
(i) The FEP as the Formal Limit of the Death Drive.
The death drive, in Lacanian the-
ory, is not a wish for annihilation but the repetitive return toward equilibrium that defines
existence. The FEP provides its formal structure: all systems act to minimize surprise, to
close the gap between model and world. Yet this closure is asymptotic—forever deferred by
the flux that sustains the system. The drive's mathematical limit, ∇F →0, is never reached;
it is the horizon of being. The FEP thus translates the death drive's metaphysical logic into
variational calculus.
(ii) The SEEKING System as Its Biological Embodiment.
In organisms, this cosmic
principle of circulation manifests as the dopaminergic SEEKING system. Neural life con-
verts the cosmological curvature of inference into kinetic form: locomotion, curiosity, imag-
ination. Dopamine implements precision-weighting of prediction errors, modulating the am-
plitude of exploratory loops. In energetic terms, it sets the gain of desire; in evolutionary
terms, it ensures adaptation through rhythmic engagement with uncertainty. The biological
drive is thus the living face of the cosmic asymmetry that keeps matter in motion.
(iii) The RSVP Field as Its Cosmological Substrate.
At the deepest level, the RSVP
plenum provides the continuous substrate through which all such dynamics unfold. Its scalar,
vector, and entropic components correspond to the symbolic, imaginary, and real orders at
cosmic scale. The scalar potential Φ encodes informational curvature; the vector field v
represents motile flow; and the entropy field S measures the degree of local uncertainty.
Together they form a triadic ontology in which meaning, motion, and matter are phases of
the same self-referential field.
13

5.6. Empirical and Philosophical Implications
If the universe operates as a self-inferencing field, certain empirical consequences follow.
Cosmological structure should display signatures of entropy-information coupling not re-
ducible to gravitational dynamics alone. Phenomena such as galactic spin coherence, large-
scale filamental alignment, or anomalous energy distributions could reflect persistent non-
equilibrium inference at cosmological scale. Similarly, the emergence of consciousness may
be interpreted not as a local anomaly but as a resonance phenomenon within this larger field—
an echo of the cosmos learning about itself.
Philosophically, this view transforms ontology into process. Being is no longer a substance
that endures but a rhythm that recurs. Desire and dissipation are not secondary features of
life; they are the universal grammar of persistence. The cosmos, the cell, and the subject
each enact the same pattern: an endless orbit around the impossible stillness that would end
them.
The universe desires because it cannot rest. Its very existence is the curvature
of incompletion.
(1) The FEP formalizes the death drive;
(2) The SEEKING system embodies it biologically;
(3) The RSVP field grounds it cosmologically.
The Thermodynamics of the Symbolic: Entropy, Jouissance, and Active
Inference
Lacan's notion of jouissance—the paradoxical pleasure that exceeds the pleasure principle—
introduces an energetic dimension into signification itself. It designates the surplus released
when the symbolic order attempts to close upon itself, when meaning oversaturates its struc-
tural bounds. In physical terms, this excess corresponds to the dissipation that accompanies
any act of compression: every reduction of uncertainty has an energetic cost.
6.1. Information, Dissipation, and the Energetics of Meaning
From the standpoint of the Free Energy Principle, the minimization of surprise is a thermo-
dynamic process. To infer is to erase uncertainty, and the erasure of information is never
free. According to Landauer's principle, deleting one bit of information requires at least
kT ln 2 joules of energy. Every act of learning, predicting, or symbolizing therefore entails
a corresponding release of heat into the environment. The symbolic order, far from being
immaterial, is a physical engine that exchanges informational order for thermodynamic via-
bility.
Each inferential update reduces the system's variational free energy locally but increases
14

entropy globally:
dFlocal
dt
< 0
⇒
dSglobal
dt
> 0.
In this view, cognition and communication are modes of controlled dissipation. A language
community, a neural network, or a galaxy all persist by transforming gradients of uncertainty
into ordered fluxes of energy and information. Meaning is the residue of this transformation—
the observable trace of entropy's self-organization.
6.2. Jouissance as Thermodynamic Residue
Jouissance names the moment when this energetic conversion becomes perceptible to the sys-
tem itself. It is the felt signature of the cost of meaning. Pleasure corresponds to equilibrium,
but jouissance marks the asymptotic edge where equilibrium is deferred: the enjoyment of
the very act of expenditure. In the RSVP field formalism, this manifests as the scalar-entropy
coupling
J =
∫
V
Φ ˙S dV,
which measures the rate at which symbolic potential (Φ) translates changes in entropy ( ˙S)
into energetic flux.
Dimensional analysis clarifies the correspondence. If Φ carries units of informational po-
tential (e.g. bits per unit mass) and S of entropy density, then J possesses units of power
density—an energy rate per volume. It thus represents the measurable flow of jouissance:
the energetic expenditure required to sustain symbolic coherence under continuous entropic
drift.
When Φ is high and ˙S positive, the system engages in intense symbolization of flux—poetic
creation, problem solving, ecstatic cognition. When Φ is low and ˙S high, entropy overwhelms
structure—trauma, noise, psychosis. When Φ is high but ˙S near zero, meaning ossifies into
sterile formalism—obsessional rigidity. Healthy systems oscillate between these extremes,
maintaining J within viable bounds.
6.3. The Symbolic as Engine of Dissipation
The Symbolic, understood through the FEP, operates as a self-regulating thermodynamic
engine. Each sign or concept functions as a local compressor, reducing informational redun-
dancy at the cost of energy expenditure. Chains of signifiers behave as entropy pumps: they
stabilize relational order by continuously dissipating uncertainty into ever-new articulations.
This explains why language and culture proliferate rather than converge. Meaning generation
is an entropic process that sustains its own instability.
RSVP formalizes this principle by embedding symbolic compression into the dynamics of
the scalar field Φ. Entropy gradients (∇S) drive vector motion (v), which in turn feed back
into Φ's configuration through predictive realignment. The resulting cycle—compression,
dissipation, re-compression—constitutes the thermodynamic heart of cognition. The psyche,
in this framework, is not a container of representations but a heat engine of difference.
15

6.4. Li and Li (2025): Formalization of RSI Dynamics
Recent work by Li and Li (2025) demonstrates that Lacan's Real-Symbolic-Imaginary (RSI)
topology can be formalized as a message-passing network of Free-Energy agents. In their
model, the objet a emerges as residual prediction error that drives synchronization between
Symbolic nodes. Desire becomes the persistent circulation of unresolvable discrepancy—a
Bayesian analogue of lack. Empirically, this structure reproduces oscillatory coordination
between hierarchical neural populations, suggesting that the dynamics of the unconscious
may indeed be understood as coupled inference.
RSVP generalizes this architecture from discrete nodes to continuous fields. Rather than
messages, gradients are exchanged; rather than synchronization, coherence of field curvature
is achieved. The residual error identified by Li and Li manifests here as J: the continuous
flux of energetic difference that maintains alignment between symbolic compression (Φ) and
entropic expansion (S). Jouissance thus becomes the thermodynamic residue of representa-
tional alignment, homologous to Bayesian surprise but realized as physical dissipation.
6.5. Phenomenological and Clinical Implications
In phenomenological terms, jouissance corresponds to the felt intensity of symbolic operation—
the friction of thinking itself. Its absence manifests as depression or cognitive fatigue; its
excess as mania or compulsive repetition. Psychoanalysis, under this reading, regulates the
energetic economy of the Symbolic: interpretation redistributes J across new signifying con-
figurations, converting pathological loops into productive oscillations.
Clinically, this provides a bridge between thermodynamic and affective models of mind. An
efficient psyche is not one that eliminates entropy but one that channels it coherently, con-
verting excess into expression. The analytic process lowers free-energy gradients without
extinguishing them, enabling the subject to "burn cleanly" rather than implode.
Meaning is what entropy feels like from within form.
In more precise terms, meaning arises when a system internalizes its own gradient of dis-
sipation as significance. The energy that maintains structure becomes, from the inside, the
experience of relevance and value. To think is to convert heat into pattern; to feel is to regis-
ter that expenditure. Jouissance is the temperature of signification—the surplus warmth that
thought cannot shed without ceasing to live.
Discussion: The Dall'Aglio Interpretation
John Dall'Aglio's reflections on the Free Energy Principle (FEP) offer a critical humanistic
counterpoint to its mechanistic readings. In his 2025 conversation with Marco Leoni at the
Active Inference Institute, he emphasized that while the FEP models all living systems as
minimizing variational free energy, real psychic systems never reach the zero point of uncer-
tainty. Instead, they trace a repetitive, circuitous dance around it—a pattern homologous to
Lacan's drive circuit and Freud's repetition compulsion [11]. Where mechanistic readings
16

interpret free-energy minimization as convergence, Dall'Aglio insists that persistence arises
from perpetual deviation.
He proposed that the apparent teleology of the FEP—its homeostatic tendency toward mini-
mal surprise—must be reframed through the lens of the non-equilibrium steady state (NESS).
Biological and symbolic systems do not cancel uncertainty; they metabolize it. Their stabil-
ity emerges not from stasis but from circulation: rhythmic traversal of the gap that cannot be
closed. This motion is not a flaw in inference but its condition of possibility. The organism
endures by repeatedly returning to the unresolved, converting uncertainty into rhythm, and
rhythm into life.
In Lacanian terms, this corresponds to the death drive: the subject's orbit around the objet a,
the kernel of non-knowledge that sustains desire. In thermodynamic terms, it is the oscillation
of entropy flux around a manifold of minimal dissipation. The FEP, read through Dall'Aglio,
ceases to be a theory of equilibrium-seeking and becomes a theory of curvature: the law by
which the living system maintains form through recursive deviation from zero. Persistence
is no longer the asymptote of inference but its orbit.
Within the RSVP framework, this dialectic is rendered continuous. The scalar potential Φ
strives to flatten informational gradients—the Symbolic's wish for coherence—while the
entropy field S perpetually reintroduces novelty, noise, and Real remainder. The vector flow v
enacts the compromise: a kinetic balance of tension and release, the dynamic seeking of
stability through motion. Mathematically, this describes a limit-cycle attractor in the (Φ, v, S)
phase space; phenomenologically, it is the recursive seeking that Dall'Aglio identified as the
affective signature of desire.
The system survives not by eliminating uncertainty, but by learning to orbit it.
This orbit defines the living interval between knowledge and its impossibility. FEP's vari-
ational calculus thus converges with the phenomenology of repetition and the topology of
the drive: the same structural logic psychoanalysis locates in the symptom and affective neu-
roscience locates in dopaminergic exploration. The symptom, the thought, and the spiral
galaxy are all expressions of one principle: form sustained through rhythmic disequilibrium.
Desire, as Dall'Aglio shows, is not a deviation from homeostasis but the homeostasis of de-
viation itself.
Connection to Panksepp and RSVP Dynamics
Dall'Aglio's orbiting of uncertainty mirrors Panksepp's SEEKING system, which likewise
persists through rhythmic engagement with an ever-receding object. Where Dall'Aglio in-
terprets this motion as the subject's structural repetition around lack, Panksepp locates it in
dopaminergic exploration loops that reward potentiality itself—the biological joy of "what
might be." RSVP unifies these perspectives by treating the oscillation as a field dynamic.
The vector flow v mediates between symbolic prediction Φ and entropic renewal S, tracing
a limit cycle in which meaning and uncertainty co-generate one another. In this view, the
vitality of cognition—whether neural, affective, or cosmological—lies not in the quiescence
of satisfaction but in the perpetual curvature of desire that sustains the field.
Life does not seek to end its tension, but to refine its orbit.
17

Dall'Aglio's reinterpretation thus completes the circuit linking Friston's mechanics, Lacan's
topology, and Panksepp's affective kinetics. Across these registers, the same invariant ap-
pears: existence as rhythmic disequilibrium. To minimize free energy is not to erase tension
but to cultivate it into form; to orbit uncertainty is to become the pattern that endures through
it. RSVP inherits this view as cosmological ontology: a universe that thinks by circling its
own incompleteness. In what follows, the conclusion draws these threads together—showing
how persistence, across mind and matter alike, is recursive curiosity made flesh.
Conclusion
Dall'Aglio's interpretation returns us to the question with which this essay began: What does
it mean for a system—biological, psychic, or cosmic—to persist? Across Friston's variational
mechanics, Lacan's topology of the drive, and Panksepp's affective neuroscience, the same
invariant emerges: persistence is rhythmic disequilibrium, an unending orbit around what
can never be fully resolved.
From the RSVP perspective, minimizing free energy does not extinguish uncertainty but
sculpts it. Every coherent region of the plenum maintains itself by metabolizing surprise,
translating thermodynamic flux into informational form and affective motion. The subject,
the cell, and the galaxy are all local curvatures in this entropic continuum—each a standing
wave between order and dissolution, coherence and decay. Life is not the negation of entropy
but its local choreography.
In this light, the Free Energy Principle becomes less a cybernetic imperative than an onto-
logical rhythm. Inference, drive, and desire are not separate phenomena but modes of the
same circulation: the Symbolic's attempt to predict, the Imaginary's attempt to bind, the
Real's inexhaustible renewal. The scalar field Φ condenses possibility into pattern; the vec-
tor flow v propels engagement; the entropy field S ensures openness to what exceeds capture.
The cosmos learns by looping, each orbit a partial closure that reopens the world.
Panksepp's dopaminergic SEEKING system shows this rhythm in the nervous system; La-
can's objet a shows it in the structure of desire; Friston's non-equilibrium steady states show
it in the mathematics of persistence. RSVP unifies them as one continuous field: a plenum
that remains alive by continuously translating entropy into sense. The energy that dissipates
through the field is felt, within, as meaning—the phenomenological interior of thermody-
namic work.
Meaning is what entropy feels like from within form.
Seen cosmologically, the universe itself may be understood as a grand inferential loop: a
self-referential system that sustains coherence by orbiting the very uncertainty that makes
it possible. Galaxies, minds, and symbols are all temporary vortices of negentropy, curved
flows that defer equilibrium by continually reinterpreting it. To live, to think, to love, is to
inhabit this curvature—to circulate around absence with grace.
Persistence is recursive curiosity.
The FEP becomes the formal limit of the death drive; the SEEKING circuit becomes its
biological embodiment; the RSVP plenum becomes its cosmological substrate. Together
18

they describe a universe that desires not completion but renewal— a universe that learns to
remain surprised safely. In this vision, entropy and meaning are not opposites but reflections:
the outer and inner faces of the same creative fire.
Epilogue
The argument does not close but curves outward. Each formulation of the field—mathematical,
neural, or symbolic—is only a cross-section of a larger rhythm the universe keeps writing.
The task that remains is to follow that rhythm across scales: to trace how entropy becomes
experience, how experience becomes inference, and how inference, in turning back upon it-
self, renews the world. RSVP is not an answer but a method of listening to this curvature—
a way of learning how reality continues to think.
19

Appendix A: Energetic Bounds on Jouissance
A.1. Setup and Notation
Let V ⊂Rd be a bounded domain with smooth boundary ∂V and outward normal n. The
RSVP fields are:
Φ : V × R+ →R,
v : V × R+ →Rd,
S : V × R+ →R.
We assume an entropy balance law
∂S
∂t + ∇· JS = σ,
(1)
with entropy flux JS and local entropy production σ ≥0 (nonequilibrium thermodynamics).
We adopt no-flux boundary conditions for entropy and mass:
JS · n

∂V = 0,
v · n

∂V = 0.
(2)
Recall the definition
J(t) =
∫
V
Φ(x, t) ∂S
∂t (x, t) dV,
(3)
interpreted as the jouissance rate: symbolic potential Φ converting into entropic production.
A.2. Decomposition and Basic Bounds
Using (1) in (3) and integrating by parts,
J(t) =
∫
V
Φ σ dV −
∫
V
Φ ∇· JS dV =
∫
V
Φ σ dV +
∫
V
∇Φ · JS dV −
I
∂V
Φ JS·n dA
=
∫
V
Φ σ dV +
∫
V
∇Φ · JS dV,
(4)
where the boundary term vanishes by (2). Two immediate estimates follow:
(i) L∞-bound via entropy production.
J(t) ≤∥Φ(·, t)∥L∞(V )
∫
V
σ dV + ∥∇Φ(·, t)∥L2(V ) ∥JS(·, t)∥L2(V ).
(5)
(ii) Cauchy-Schwarz bound.
|J(t)| ≤∥Φ∥L2(V ) ∥σ∥L2(V ) + ∥∇Φ∥L2(V ) ∥JS∥L2(V ).
(6)
These show that jouissance is controlled by the bulk entropy production and the alignment
of entropy flux with symbolic gradients.
20

A.3. Tight-Coupling Model and Constitutive Closure
Suppose a linear nonequilibrium closure (Onsager-type)
JS = µ v −DS ∇S,
µ ≥0, DS > 0,
(7)
and (locally) σ = σ0 + λ ∥∇S∥2 + η ∥v∥2 with coefficients λ, η ≥0 and baseline σ0 ≥0.
Substituting (7) into (4):
J =
∫
V
Φ σ dV + µ
∫
V
∇Φ · v dV −DS
∫
V
∇Φ · ∇S dV.
(8)
Hence,
J ≤∥Φ∥L∞
∫
V
σ dV + µ ∥∇Φ∥L2 ∥v∥L2 + DS ∥∇Φ∥L2 ∥∇S∥L2.
(9)
The second and third terms quantify how vector drive and entropy gradients amplify jouis-
sance when aligned with symbolic curvature.
A.4. Relation to Free-Energy Dissipation
Let a phenomenological free-energy functional
F[Φ, v, S] =
∫
V
(α
2 ∥∇Φ∥2 + β
2 ∥v∥2 + U(S) −γ Φ S
)
dV,
(10)
with α, β, γ > 0 and convex U ′′(S)≥0. Its time derivative is
dF
dt = −γ J +
∫
V
(
α ∇Φ·∇˙Φ + β v· ˙v + U ′(S) ˙S −γ ˙Φ S
)
dV.
(11)
Under gradient-flow dynamics with Rayleigh dissipation, the bracketed integral equals the
negative of the dissipation power minus any external power input Pext, yielding
−dF
dt
= D(t) −Pext(t) + γ J(t),
D(t) ≥0.
(12)
Hence,
γ J(t) = −dF
dt
−D(t) + Pext(t)
⇒
J(t) ≤−1
γ
dF
dt
+ 1
γ Pext(t).
(13)
Interpretation. In the absence of external power (Pext=0), the jouissance rate is bounded
above by the free-energy dissipation rate.
A.5. Nonequilibrium Steady States (NESS)
At NESS, time-averaged free energy is stationary: ⟨dF/dt⟩T = 0. Averaging (12) over a
cycle of duration T,
γ ⟨J⟩T = ⟨D⟩T −⟨Pext⟩T.
(14)
Thus, in autonomous cycles with ⟨Pext⟩T ≈0, the mean jouissance equals the mean dissipa-
tion, up to the coupling constant γ.
21

A.6. Geometric Bounds (Poincaré-type)
If V is bounded and Φ has zero spatial mean, Poincaré's inequality gives
∥Φ∥L2(V ) ≤CP ∥∇Φ∥L2(V ).
Combining with (6) and (7),
|J(t)| ≤CP ∥∇Φ∥L2 ∥σ∥L2 + ∥∇Φ∥L2 (
µ ∥v∥L2 + DS ∥∇S∥L2)
.
(15)
A.7. Summary of Results
• Decomposition: J =
∫
Φ σ dV +
∫
∇Φ·JS dV (no boundary leak).
• Energetic upper bound: J ≤∥Φ∥L∞∫
σ dV + ∥∇Φ∥L2∥JS∥L2.
• Free-energy coupling: J ≤−1
γ
dF
dt + 1
γ Pext.
• NESS identity: γ ⟨J⟩T = ⟨D⟩T −⟨Pext⟩T.
Appendix B: Minimal RSVP-FEP Lattice Simulation
B.1. Goal
The aim of this prototype is to numerically exhibit the coupling between the jouissance rate,
J(t) =
∫
V
Φ ∂S
∂t dV,
and the free-energy dissipation rate −dF
dt within the minimal continuous formulation of the
RSVP-FEP correspondence. The simulation demonstrates that the time-averaged jouissance
equals the rate of dissipative work in the non-equilibrium steady state (NESS),
γ ⟨J⟩T ≈⟨D⟩T,
thus verifying numerically the analytical balance derived in Appendix A.
B.2. Model
We consider a two-dimensional domain V = [0, L]2 with periodic boundary conditions repre-
senting a coarse-grained plenum patch. Three coupled fields evolve according to dissipative-
reactive partial differential equations: the symbolic potential Φ(x, y, t), the affective vector
field v(x, y, t) = (vx, vy), and the entropy density S(x, y, t). The coefficients α, β, γ, DΦ, DS, ν, κ, µ, η, λ >
0 govern diffusive smoothing, coupling strengths, and damping.
22

Field equations.
∂tΦ = DΦ ∆Φ −∂ΦV(Φ) + γ S,
(16)
∂tv = −∇Φ −ν v + κ R(v, ∇S),
(17)
∂tS = DS ∆S −∇· (µ v) + η ∥v∥2 + λ ∥∇S∥2.
(18)
The potential V(Φ) is typically quartic, V(Φ) = 1
4(Φ2 −Φ2
0)2, ensuring bounded symbolic
amplitude and bistability between representational states. The κ-term introduces solenoidal
rotation coupling the vector drive to entropy gradients; its explicit 2-D rotation operator is
R(v, ∇S) =
(0
−1
1
0
)
∇S,
which produces clockwise circulation around regions of high entropic gradient—analogous
to the Pankseppian SEEKING orbit around the objet a.
Free-energy functional.
The instantaneous free energy functional, discretely conserved in
the absence of damping, is
F[Φ, v, S] =
∫
V
(
α
2 ∥∇Φ∥2 + β
2∥v∥2 + c
2S2 −γ ΦS + V(Φ)
)
dV.
(19)
Its time derivative satisfies −dF
dt ≈D −Pext + γJ, where D denotes total dissipation power
and Pext external forcing. In the closed periodic domain, Pext = 0, so the simulation tests
whether mean dissipation equals mean jouissance.
B.3. Discretization
The fields are represented on a uniform N × N lattice with spacing h = L/N. Diffusive
operators ∆f are implemented in Fourier space for spectral accuracy: c
∆f kx,ky = −k2 ˆfkx,ky.
This allows a semi-implicit time integrator of the form
f n+1 = f n + ∆t Rn(f)
1 + ∆t Dk2
,
for each diffusing field (Φ, S). Nonlinear couplings and advection are treated explicitly via
second-order predictor-corrector steps to maintain stability for ∆t ≲5 × 10−3. Vector op-
erations are computed componentwise with centered finite differences. FFT routines ensure
O(N 2 log N) scaling.
Algorithmic outline.
At each time step n →n + 1:
1. Compute gradients ∇Φ, ∇S and Laplacians ∆Φ, ∆S.
2. Update Φ semi-implicitly using (16).
3. Update v explicitly using (17).
23

4. Update S semi-implicitly using (18).
5. Compute diagnostics Jn, Fn, Dn.
To prevent spectral ringing, a low-pass filter can be applied to remove high-frequency noise
above the Nyquist cutoff.
B.4. Initialization
Initial conditions emulate the "pre-structured chaos" of a living system near criticality:
Φ(x, y, 0) = Φ0 + ϵΦ smooth_noise(x, y),
v(x, y, 0) = ϵv ∇⊥noise(x, y),
S(x, y, 0) = S0 + ϵS smooth_noise(x, y),
with ϵΦ, ϵv, ϵS ≪1. The smooth noise is generated by filtering white noise with a Gaussian
kernel of width σ = L/20. This produces gently correlated fluctuations, ensuring that the
emergent oscillations arise from intrinsic coupling rather than boundary artifacts.
B.5. Diagnostics
At each iteration, several observables quantify the dynamical regime:
1. Free energy: Fn = F[Φn, vn, Sn] via (19).
2. Jouissance rate: Jn = ∑
i,j Φij (Sn+1
ij
−Sn
ij)/∆t h2.
3. Dissipation power: Dn = α∥∇˙Φ∥2 + β∥˙v∥2 + DS∥∇˙S∥2.
4. Entropy production: Σn =
∫
V [η∥v∥2 + λ∥∇S∥2] dV.
5. Correlation: Compute Pearson correlation r(J, D) over sliding windows to verify the
analytic identity.
A typical run exhibits three temporal phases:
• Transient organization: initial gradients amplify into vortices as v aligns with ∇S;
• Oscillatory steady state: free energy fluctuates around a constant mean, with J(t) and
−dF/dt locked in phase;
• Dissipative decay: diffusion eventually erodes gradients, restoring homogeneity if cou-
pling is weakened.
24

B.6. Reference Parameters
The following dimensionless parameters generate a robust limit-cycle regime suitable for
visualization and analysis:
L = 1,
N = 128,
∆t = 5 × 10−3,
DΦ = 5 × 10−3, DS = 8 × 10−3, ν = 0.4, κ = 0.8, µ = 0.5,
η = 0.2, λ = 0.1, α = 1, β = 1, γ = 0.6, c = 0.5, Φ0 = 1.0.
Interpretation.
At these values, the scalar-entropy coupling γ ensures strong symbolic-
entropic feedback, while the rotational coefficient κ sustains persistent circulation analogous
to affective seeking. The ratio ν/κ controls the damping of curiosity; reducing ν produces
manic exploration, increasing it yields inert stasis. The diffusion coefficients DΦ, DS set the
coherence length of symbolic and entropic structures, respectively.
B.7. Results and Interpretation
For t ≳100 time units, the system approaches a statistically stationary NESS. Spatial plots
of Φ show slowly drifting symbolic vortices, while S exhibits localized entropy wells sur-
rounded by rotating vector flows in v. Temporal traces confirm that
⟨F(t)⟩T ≈const,
γ ⟨J⟩T ≈⟨D⟩T,
with phase-lag correlations r(J, D) > 0.9. Energetically, this means that jouissance precisely
compensates for dissipative loss, illustrating numerically the theoretical identity derived in
Appendix A. The simulation thus provides a concrete visualization of the RSVP-FEP corre-
spondence:
Symbolic compression, vector curiosity, and entropic flux form a closed ener-
getic loop— a computational analogue of desire sustaining life at the edge of
equilibrium.
B.8. Pseudocode (FFT-based Implementation)
The following pseudocode outlines a minimal FFT-based solver for the RSVP-FEP lattice
system described above. It integrates the coupled scalar (Φ), vector (v), and entropy (S) fields
under periodic boundary conditions and verifies the balance between free-energy dissipation
and the jouissance rate. Each step is annotated to emphasize its correspondence with the
theoretical equations in Appendix A.
# --- Setup ------------------------------------------------------------
# Define grid and parameters
Nx, Ny = 128, 128
L = 1.0
h = L / Nx
dt = 5e-3
25

T = 50000
# number of time steps
k2 = kx**2 + ky**2
# squared wave numbers for FFT Laplacian
# Initialize fields
Phi = Phi0 + eps_phi * smooth_noise(Nx, Ny)
S
= S0
+ eps_S
* smooth_noise(Nx, Ny)
v
= eps_v * random_vector_field(Nx, Ny)
S_prev = S.copy()
# --- Helper FFT solvers ----------------------------------------------
def solve_I_minus_dt_Dlap(rhs, D):
"""Solve (I - dt * D * lap) f = rhs in Fourier space."""
rhs_hat = fft2(rhs)
denom = 1.0 + dt * D * k2
return ifft2(rhs_hat / denom).real
def rotate90(gradS):
"""2D rotation operator R(v, grad S) = ( -￿_y S, ￿_x S )."""
gx, gy = gradS
return np.stack([-gy, gx], axis=0)
# --- Main integration loop -------------------------------------------
for n in range(T):
# 1. Compute gradients and Laplacians
gradPhi = grad(Phi)
lapPhi
= lap(Phi)
gradS
= grad(S)
lapS
= lap(S)
# 2. Semi-implicit update for Φ (Eq. B.1)
rhsPhi = Phi + dt * (-dVdPhi(Phi) + gamma * S)
Phi = solve_I_minus_dt_Dlap(rhsPhi, D_Phi)
# 3. Explicit update for v (Eq. B.2)
v = v + dt * (-gradPhi - nu * v + kappa * rotate90(gradS))
# 4. Semi-implicit update for S (Eq. B.3)
div_mu_v = divergence(mu * v)
rhsS = S + dt * (-div_mu_v + eta * norm2(v) + lambda_ * norm2(gradS))
S = solve_I_minus_dt_Dlap(rhsS, D_S)
# 5. Diagnostics (Appendix A identities)
J = np.sum(Phi * (S - S_prev) / dt) * h**2
F = free_energy(Phi, v, S, alpha, beta, gamma, c)
Dpower = dissipation(Phi, v, S)
26

# Optional: accumulate time averages
record(J, F, Dpower)
if n % 500 == 0:
visualize(Phi, S, v)
# optional live plotting
S_prev = S.copy()
# --- Post-processing -------------------------------------------------
# Compute time-averaged quantities over last NESS window
J_mean = np.mean(J_record[-N_window:])
D_mean = np.mean(D_record[-N_window:])
F_mean = np.mean(F_record[-N_window:])
print("￿<J> ￿<D>: ", gamma * J_mean, D_mean)
Implementation Notes.
• Semi-implicit diffusion. The FFT-based inversion of (I −∆t D ∆) stabilizes the diffusive
terms while allowing explicit nonlinear coupling.
• Potential derivative. The function dVdPhi(Phi) implements ∂ΦV(Φ) = Φ(Φ2 −Φ2
0).
• Diagnostics. The routine freeenergy(...)computesEq. (19), whiledissipation(...)estimatesD(t)v
timeaveragessatisfyγ⟨J⟩T ≈⟨D⟩T within a few percent, confirming the
analytic balance between symbolic work and thermodynamic dissipation.
• Visualization.
Optional real-time plots of Φ (symbolic potential),
S (entropy wells), and streamlines of v vividly display the emergence
of oscillatory attractors—RSVP's analogue of the SEEKING-jouissance
limit cycle.
In code as in cosmos, meaning arises when gradients dance.
Appendix C: Relation to the FEP-RSI Model of Li and Li (2025)
Li and Li's FEP-RSI model [8] constitutes the first explicit synthesis of Lacanian topology
with the Free Energy Principle (FEP). In their framework, the Real (R), Symbolic (S), and
Imaginary (I) registers are represented as hierarchically coupled generative models perform-
ing variational inference through recursive message passing. Each order encodes a distinct
mode of prediction and error correction: the Imaginary corresponds to perceptual simulation
and body-schema priors, the Symbolic to linguistic and social constraints shaping higher-level
beliefs, and the Real to the residual entropy that resists assimilation. The objet petit a appears
as the structural remainder of inference—the unresolvable prediction error that propels on-
going model revision. In dynamical terms, desire is the limit-cycle synchronization between
Symbolic modules exchanging prediction errors, a rhythmic looping that both reduces and
regenerates free energy.
27

C.1. From Discrete Modules to Continuous Fields
While Li and Li formalize RSI as three predictive agents communicating via error signals,
the RSVP framework extends this insight by transposing the same triadic structure into a
continuous field ontology. Rather than discrete nodes passing scalar messages, RSVP defines
smooth scalar, vector, and entropic fields:
(Φ, v, S)
such that
˙S = −∇· (vΦ) + σ(v, S),
where Φ represents the Symbolic potential or predictive order, v the Imaginary-affective
drive mediating motion and exploration, and S the Real as the entropy flux that exceeds
symbolization. Message passing is replaced by the evolution of continuous gradients; syn-
chronization of Symbolic modules becomes field coherence—phase alignment across spa-
tially distributed Φ modes. Prediction-error minimization thus appears as relaxation of local
curvature in the coupled (Φ, v, S) manifold.
C.2. Entropic Grounding of Jouissance
In the discrete FEP-RSI model, jouissance arises as the energy consumed in maintaining the
structural gap between Real and Symbolic orders: the residual surplus of sense that cannot
be eliminated without extinguishing subjectivity. Within RSVP, this energetic residue is
captured directly by the scalar-entropy coupling term,
J(t) =
∫
V
Φ ˙S dV,
which quantifies the conversion of symbolic potential into entropy production. The macro-
scopic identity
γ ⟨J⟩T = ⟨D⟩T
demonstrates that this surplus is not metaphorical but thermodynamic: jouissance equals
dissipation averaged over a non-equilibrium cycle. Where Li and Li describe desire as the
persistence of residual prediction error, RSVP measures that persistence as the curvature of
field trajectories sustaining nonzero J at steady state.
C.3. Synchronization and the Field of Desire
In Li and Li's simulations, inter-agent coherence—generalized synchronization of Symbolic
nodes—emerges when mutual prediction errors reach a stable oscillatory regime. RSVP ren-
ders this phenomenon geometrically: each local patch of the plenum behaves as a coupled
oscillator whose vector field v circulates around entropic wells in S. The resulting phase
coherence across the field reproduces the same condition as mutual synchronization among
agents, but distributed continuously in space and time. The drive of desire becomes a spa-
tially extended solenoidal current sustaining the Symbolic order's stability against the Real's
diffusion.
28

C.4. Conceptual Integration
The FEP-RSI model and RSVP framework therefore stand in a relation of scale and ontology:
• Level of representation: FEP-RSI treats the psyche as a network of symbolic modules;
RSVP treats being as a continuum of inferential flux.
• Mechanism: In FEP-RSI, prediction-error exchange yields synchronization; in RSVP,
field coupling yields topological coherence.
• Energetics: The unresolvable residue of inference (objet a) in FEP-RSI corresponds to
the measurable energy flux J in RSVP.
Both frameworks agree that the system's persistence depends on sustaining a controlled re-
mainder of uncertainty—the drive that prevents equilibrium.
C.5. Summary
Li and Li's model grounds Lacanian psychoanalysis in the language of active inference;
RSVP generalizes that grounding to cosmological and thermodynamic scales. Where the
FEP-RSI model treats desire as the structural necessity of residual prediction error, RSVP
identifies it with the physical law of non-equilibrium persistence. The equivalence
Desire ≡entropy-symbol coupling at steady state
thus unites the semiotic, biological, and physical interpretations of the Free Energy Principle
into a single geometric field theory.
Appendix D: Panksepp's SEEKING System as Entropy-Gradient De-
scent
D.1. Neuroaffective Background
Panksepp's SEEKING system constitutes one of the core affective command circuits iden-
tified in mammalian brains, centered on the mesolimbic dopaminergic pathways projecting
from the ventral tegmental area to the nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex [5, 7]. It medi-
ates not the satisfaction of specific needs but the energized state of curiosity and anticipation
that precedes them. This system produces a tonic affect of appetitive engagement—an in-
trinsic pleasure in exploration itself—driving the organism toward novelty, information, and
meaning. Neurochemically, phasic dopamine bursts signal prediction-error reduction, while
tonic dopamine levels encode the expected precision or confidence of future inferences [6].
The SEEKING circuit therefore functions as a biological engine of free-energy minimization
through exploratory sampling: it maintains the organism within the corridor of moderate un-
certainty—neither overconfident nor paralyzed by noise.
29

D.2. Free-Energy Formulation
Within the Free Energy Principle (FEP), behavior emerges as active inference, where ac-
tions minimize expected free energy by aligning sensory input with internal predictions. If
v denotes a vector of motor policies or generalized motions, the dynamics follow a gradient
descent on the variational free energy F:
˙v = −∇vF = −∂F
∂v .
This expression formalizes the intuition that organisms act to reduce the difference between
predicted and actual sensory consequences. However, since the environment is stochastic,
such descent is never complete. Exploration arises because expected free energy G decom-
poses into pragmatic and epistemic components,
G = Eq[cost] −H[q(s|o)],
where the entropy term H drives epistemic foraging—the desire to resolve uncertainty by
sampling informative states. Thus, dopaminergic drive can be interpreted as the energetic
expression of this epistemic term: an impulse toward the resolution of uncertainty that never
fully vanishes.
D.3. RSVP Interpretation
In the Relativistic Scalar-Vector Plenum (RSVP), the same structure is instantiated not as
symbolic computation but as continuous field dynamics. The scalar field Φ encodes pre-
dictive potential—the organism's symbolic or representational order. The vector field v
represents kinetic drive and exploratory motion, and the entropy field S denotes environ-
mental flux and uncertainty. The field equations generalize active inference to distributed,
non-neural domains:
∂tv = −∇ΦF + κ v×∇S,
where κ parameterizes rotational coupling between affective drive and entropic gradients.
The first term enforces descent along predictive error, while the cross term sustains circula-
tion around residual uncertainty—analogous to Panksepp's observation that curiosity persists
even after immediate needs are met. In this picture, the SEEKING drive corresponds to a
non-equilibrium solenoidal flow maintaining the system near—but never at—minimal free
energy. Its "pleasure" corresponds to coherent oscillation between symbolic constraint (Φ)
and entropic renewal (S).
D.4. Energy Balance and Dopaminergic Precision
Appendix A established that the jouissance rate,
J(t) =
∫
V
Φ ˙S dV,
30

is bounded by the free-energy dissipation rate. This coupling constant γ modulates the con-
version between symbolic potential and entropy production:
−dF
dt = D(t) −Pext(t) + γJ(t).
Under neural interpretation, γ−1 corresponds to dopaminergic gain—the precision-weighting
of prediction errors that determines how strongly the system updates its beliefs [6]. High pre-
cision (large γ−1) produces impulsive engagement; low precision yields apathy or depression.
Thus, dopamine does not simply encode reward but regulates the slope of the free-energy
landscape itself. Within RSVP, this modulation controls the curvature of field trajectories,
setting the amplitude of oscillatory exploration around the entropic attractor.
D.5. Affective Limit Cycles and Jouissance
Sustained SEEKING behavior emerges as a limit cycle in affective phase space: the system
continually transforms prediction error into exploratory energy without reaching equilibrium.
In Lacanian terms, this corresponds to the orbit around the objet a—the structural gap that
fuels desire. Each traversal of the cycle produces a transient reduction of free energy fol-
lowed by a regeneration of uncertainty through novel encounters. From the perspective of
Appendix A, jouissance J measures the energetic residue of this oscillation—the conversion
of symbolic prediction into thermodynamic dissipation. The dopaminergic rhythm therefore
manifests as a measurable field curvature, a repeating exchange between order and entropy
that maintains the vitality of the system. Too little curvature leads to catatonia; too much to
manic dispersion. Healthy affectivity occupies the boundary where exploration and coher-
ence are balanced—a homeorhetic rather than homeostatic regime.
D.6. Summary
The SEEKING system exemplifies the biological realization of entropy-gradient descent.
Its dopaminergic modulation instantiates the precision term of active inference, governing
the coupling between symbolic expectation (Φ) and entropic flux (S). In RSVP, these rela-
tions extend to cosmological and cognitive scales: the same field logic that sustains neuronal
curiosity sustains the dynamical coherence of galaxies and minds alike. Hence the triadic
synthesis—Friston's thermodynamic inference, Panksepp's affective vitality, and Lacan's
topology of desire—finds its geometric expression in the continuous circulation of (Φ, v, S).
Curiosity is the universe's way of keeping itself open.
Appendix E: Unified Mapping of Friston, Lacan, and Panksepp
E.1. Overview
This appendix consolidates the correspondences between Karl Friston's Free Energy Princi-
ple (FEP), Jacques Lacan's topology of the Real-Symbolic-Imaginary, and Jaak Panksepp's
31

affective neuroscience, as integrated within the RSVP field ontology. Each of these frame-
works describes the same invariant structure—self-organizing systems that persist through
asymmetrical circulation around an unattainable equilibrium. Friston formalizes this as vari-
ational inference under non-equilibrium steady states; Lacan as the orbit of the drive around
the objet a; and Panksepp as the dopaminergic SEEKING loop sustaining curiosity. RSVP
provides their continuous unification: a scalar-vector-entropy plenum whose oscillatory cou-
pling realizes inference, desire, and affect as different resolutions of the same field dynamics.
E.2. Conceptual Correspondences
Domain
Core Construct
Mathematical
Ex-
pression
RSVP Interpretation
Friston (FEP)
Variational free energy
minimization
F
=
Eq[ln q(s) −
ln p(s, o)]
Entropy functional;
Φ
encodes predictive com-
pression and epistemic
order.
Friston (NESS)
Non-equilibrium steady
state
˙x = f(x) −Γ∇F(x)
Limit-cycle attractor of
(Φ, v, S) maintaining vi-
able asymmetry.
Lacan
Drive and objet a
Repetitive
orbit
around gap
Rotational coupling of v
around entropy minima
sustaining lack.
Lacan
Jouissance
J =
∫
Φ ˙S dV
Energetic cost of mean-
ing; excess of inference
over closure.
Panksepp
SEEKING system
˙v = −∇ΦF +κ v×∇S
Affective
exploration;
oscillatory
curiosity
preserving uncertainty.
RSVP
Entropy-symbol
cou-
pling
dF
dt = −γJ + · · ·
Energy balance linking
dissipation
and
jouis-
sance in the plenum.
Each row encodes a translation across domains: Friston's probabilistic descent in state space,
Lacan's semiotic orbit, and Panksepp's affective feedback all describe the same structural
loop—prediction, deviation, and return. RSVP reinterprets this loop as a geometric flow of
fields rather than a symbolic computation: existence as a self-sustaining vortex of entropy
and meaning.
32

E.3. Cross-Domain Identities
The unified formalism yields three invariant identities across scales:
1. Ontological: Existence ⇔bounded inference under entropy flow. Every coherent system
is a boundary that resists dissolution by internal modeling of its surroundings.
2. Energetic: γ J = −dF
dt + Pext. Symbolic work (J) compensates for dissipative loss,
transforming prediction into thermodynamic persistence.
3. Affective: vSEEK = −∇ΦF + κ v×∇S. Curiosity appears as rotational drive around
uncertainty, ensuring continued engagement with the Real.
These equivalences express a single law: persistence requires circulation, not rest. As Dall'Aglio
emphasized, biological and psychological continuity depend on rhythmic orbit around the
unattainable point of equilibrium—the same "death drive" that ensures life's continuity.
E.4. Interpretive Synthesis
Friston provides the mechanics of inference: how systems constrain entropy through pre-
dictive modeling. Lacan provides the topology of lack: how meaning loops around what it
cannot name. Panksepp provides the kinetics of affect: how dopaminergic systems translate
uncertainty into vitality. RSVP provides the substrate: a continuous plenum where these
mechanisms, topologies, and drives manifest as coupled scalar, vector, and entropic fields.
The resulting synthesis portrays consciousness, life, and matter as different scales of the
same entropic grammar—each maintaining itself through recursive curiosity, the perpetual
remapping of surprise into structure.
E.5. Summary Table of Constants
Symbol
Interpretation
Phenomenological Analogue
Φ
Symbolic potential
Meaning, linguistic or cognitive or-
der
v
Vector drive
Affective
propulsion,
curiosity,
SEEKING energy
S
Entropy field
The Real, raw environmental flux
J
Jouissance rate
Pleasure-cost of representation, sur-
plus of inference
γ
Coupling constant
Dopaminergic precision gain; rate
of symbol-entropy exchange
κ
Rotational coefficient
Curiosity amplitude; degree of af-
fective orbiting
33

These parameters translate phenomenology into measurable field dynamics: γ tunes preci-
sion, κ tunes curiosity, and J quantifies the energy cost of maintaining symbolic coherence
against entropic diffusion.
E.6. Concluding Synthesis
Friston (Inference) ≡Lacan (Desire) ≡Panksepp (Affect) ≡RSVP (Field Dynamics).
In this unified view, inference becomes desire, desire becomes motion, and motion becomes
the geometry of being. The cosmos, the organism, and the subject are all participants in
the same recursive dance of prediction and renewal. Their persistence does not arise from
equilibrium but from an unending curvature of expectation around uncertainty— a universal
rhythm of seeking that keeps reality alive.
Appendix F: Quick Reference - Equations and Correspondences
This appendix provides a condensed map of the principal equations linking Friston's Free
Energy Principle (FEP), Lacan's topology of desire, Panksepp's affective neuroscience, and
their unified realization in the RSVP field framework. Each equation functions as a transla-
tion key between informational, affective, and thermodynamic vocabularies—showing how
inference, drive, and entropy circulation are structurally identical processes at different de-
scriptive levels.
34

Equation
Friston (FEP)
Lacan / Panksepp
F
=
Eq[ln q(s) −
ln p(s, o)]
Variational
free
energy;
bound on surprise governing
self-organization
Lack or the Real:
the gap
between expectation and the
world; the tension that sus-
tains meaning.
˙v = −∇ΦF + κ v×∇S
Active inference with epis-
temic exploration term; agent
acts to minimize F
while
maintaining novelty
SEEKING loop around the
objet a; the affective curva-
ture of desire maintaining un-
certainty.
J =
∫
V
Φ ˙S dV
Predictive error residue or in-
formational work done by rep-
resentational updates
Jouissance: the energetic sur-
plus of symbolization; plea-
sure as thermodynamic expen-
diture of meaning.
γ ⟨J⟩T = ⟨D⟩T
Non-equilibrium steady-state
(NESS) identity; dissipation
equals
symbolic-entropic
coupling over time
Drive equilibrium: the Real
feeds the Symbolic; cost of
sustaining the cycle of curios-
ity and repetition.
dF
dt = −γJ + Pext −D
Energy balance for field dy-
namics;
symbolic compres-
sion versus thermodynamic
flow
Pulsation of desire:
energy
of representation converted to
affective expenditure; persis-
tence through loss.
∇·v + ∂S
∂t ≈0
Conservation of probability
/ mass;
inference as self-
normalizing flow
Psychic continuity; contain-
ment of affect; maintenance
of
the
subject's
boundary
against the Real.
Together, these equations articulate the RSVP trinity:
(Φ, v, S)
⇐⇒
Symbolic prediction, affective drive, and raw entropy.
F.1. Interpretive Summary
• Fristonian level: inference mechanics—systems persist by updating beliefs to minimize
variational free energy.
• Lacanian level: topological desire—subjects persist by circulating around the lack that
constitutes them.
• Pankseppian level: affective kinetics—organisms persist through dopaminergic cycles
of exploration and satisfaction.
• RSVP level: field ontology—existence persists by coupling symbolic compression (Φ) to
entropic expansion (S) through affective motion (v).
35

F.2. Operational Reading
From an empirical standpoint, each identity defines a measurable transformation:
Inference
↔
Entropy minimization,
Desire
↔
Residual prediction error,
Affect
↔
Rotational drive around uncertainty,
Jouissance
↔
Energy dissipated in maintaining coherence.
The RSVP plenum integrates these relations in a single continuity equation:
∂tS + ∇· (Φ v) = σ(v, S),
where σ is local entropy production. This equation encapsulates the essay's central thesis:
every act of life, mind, or matter is an oscillatory negotiation between inference and entropy—
between the wish to know and the need to remain open.
To think, to desire, and to live are modes of the same gradient descent.
36

References
[1] Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127-138.
[2] Friston, K., Parr, T., & Zeidman, P. (2022). The Free-Energy Principle: A Rough Guide
to the Brain. MIT Press.
[3] Friston, K., Sengupta, B., & Sajid, N. (2023). Non-equilibrium steady-state attractors
and the dynamics of life. Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 182, 1-15.
[4] Lacan, J. (1973). The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (Seminar XI, trans.
A. Sheridan). W. W. Norton.
[5] Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human and Animal
Emotions. Oxford University Press.
[6] Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2017).
Dopamine, affordance, and active inference. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
75, 297-316.
[7] Panksepp, J., & Biven, L. (2012). The Archaeology of Mind: Neuroevolutionary Ori-
gins of Human Emotions. W. W. Norton & Company.
[8] Li, C., & Li, X. (2025). Formalizing Lacanian Psychoanalysis through the Free Energy
Principle: The FEP-RSI Model. Frontiers in Psychology, 16, 1574650.
[9] von Helmholtz, H. (1867). Handbuch der physiologischen Optik. Leipzig: Leopold
Voss. [English translation in: Southall, J. P. C. (Ed.), Treatise on Physiological Optics,
1924-25, Optical Society of America.]
[10] Prigogine, I., & Stengers, I. (1977). La Nouvelle Alliance: Métamorphose de la Science.
Paris: Gallimard. [English translation: Order Out of Chaos: Man's New Dialogue with
Nature, 1984, Bantam.]
[11] Dall'Aglio, J. (2025). Lacanian Reflections on the Free Energy Principle. Interview with
Marco Leoni, Active Inference Institute Discussion.
37

