Dynamic Teleological Alignment through RSVP-GRPO:
A Continuous Learning Pipeline Using Preference Data
Flyxion
December 9, 2025
Abstract
This paper presents a practical integration of the Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum
(RSVP) theoretical framework with Group-Relative Proximal Optimization (GRPO)
as proposed in the "Dynamic Alignment" paradigm. The objective is to transform a
simple summarization script into a continuously self-improving learning agent whose
values are grounded in RSVP's semantic axes and trajectory-aware teleology. Practi-
cally, we implement a Bash-driven pipeline that generates candidate summaries, scores
them under a multi-dimensional value metric, stores the resulting preference data, and
ultimately exposes the data to a GRPO-based training loop in Python. We illustrate
implementation details with three representative examples: (i) RSVP scoring prompts,
(ii) JSONL preference grouping, and (iii) the Bash-level self-improving loop.
1
Introduction
Recent theoretical developments propose moving beyond static alignment objectives toward
dynamic, teleological alignment systems that continuously adjust their policy trajectories
via preference signals derived from their own outputs. RSVP theory interprets intelligence
as a ﬁeld-theoretic agent whose survival depends not on coherence maximization, but on
balancing the scalar (Φ), vector (v), and entropy (S) ﬁelds over evolving semantic conditions.
The GRPO algorithm provides a practical formalism for incorporating group-based com-
parisons among candidate actions or completions. Rather than optimizing reward in a single
trajectory, GRPO exploits a group of responses to the same prompt and compares them in
terms of a reference policy. This structure interfaces naturally with RSVP's emphasis on
semantic dispersion, diversity, and entropic weightings.
1

2
Six-Dimensional RSVP Value Scoring
RSVP alignment in this project is implemented through a six-axis scoring rubric:
(elegance, sheaf, vector, entropic, structural, epistemic)
Each axis assigns a 0-5 integer value to a given candidate text. The total score is the sum
of the axes. Because GRPO requires a group-level comparison, the model generates four
parallel responses to the same prompt, and the scoring LLM returns JSON containing a
per-axis score and the ﬁnal recommended choice.
3
Example RSVP Scoring Prompt (JSON)
Below is an abbreviated scoring prompt used inside the Bash script. The assistant is in-
structed to return strict JSON for four candidate summaries:
{
"candidates":[
{"id":1,"text":"...","values":{"elegance":4,"sheaf":3,...}},
...
],
"best": 2
}
This prompt encodes the RSVP framework and ensures the response contains all six axes.
The Bash script enforces strict JSON parsing through jq, ensuring syntactic correctness and
enabling structured logging for subsequent GRPO training.
4
Group-Relative PPO (GRPO)
The GRPO loss compares candidate log-probabilities under a reference policy πref and an
evolving policy πθ. For a group of K responses indexed by i, with rewards ri, we evaluate
Ai = ri −1
K
K
X
j=1
rj.
LGRPO(θ) = −
K
X
i=1
 πθ(yi|x)
πref(yi|x)
!
Ai.
In practice, we also introduce teleological weights on the axes such that the advantage is
multiplied by a function that increases for axes exhibiting negative drift, driving alignment
correction over time.
2

5
Preference Logging via JSONL
Each processed chunk yields a single JSON object containing the prompt, the four candidates,
the six-dimensional scores, and the chosen item. A typical entry resembles:
{"prompt": "...",
"candidates":[...],
"best": 3,
"values_best":[...],
"metadata": {"chunk_id":"..."}}
Appending these JSON objects to a ﬁle (e.g. rsvpprefs.jsonl)formsadatasetforofflineGRPO/DPOtrain
6
Bash Learning Agent Pipeline
The Bash script performs the following loop:
1. Split input text files into chunks
2. Generate four parallel candidate summaries (via Ollama)
3. Score with a separate model using the RSVP prompt
4. Select the best candidate
5. Append the chosen summary to a global summary file
6. Log all candidates to JSONL (with RSVP axes)
Despite its simplicity, the Bash loop forms the outer learning cycle:
"values
first, policy later."
When combined with the Python GRPO fine-tuning code, the
system becomes a continuously evolving value-aligned agent.
7
Example Bash Fragment
A representative excerpt from the real script:
ollama run granite3.2 "Summary attempt 1:" < chunk > cand1.txt &
...
ollama run granite3.2 "Summary attempt 4:" < chunk > cand4.txt &
wait
ollama run granite3.2 "RSVP scoring prompt" \
3

<(cat cand1.txt cand2.txt cand3.txt cand4.txt) \
> scores.json
jq .best scores.json
This process demonstrates the group-level comparison required by GRPO, enforced
at the data-collection stage rather than only at training time.
8
Teleological Alignment and Trajectory
Our system measures the historical average of each RSVP axis, comparing the current
batch against prior distributions.
A negative shift in any axis accelerates its
weight in the advantage function.
This effectively biases GRPO toward correcting
semantic drift, producing a trajectory-aware alignment loop.
Formally, the per-axis teleological weight wt
a is defined by
wt
a = softplus

−(¯rt
a −¯rt−1
a
)

+ ϵ,
which increases the gradient magnitude for regressing axes, enforcing RSVPs non-
monotonic survival logic.
9
Conclusion
The combined system--Bash preference generation, RSVP scoring, JSON logging, and
GRPO optimization--constitutes a minimal, continuously learning agent.
It exemplifies
the RSVP worldview:
survival through entropic adaptation, semantic diversity,
and field-balanced coherence rather than a static notion of alignment.
By delegating
value computation to RSVP, the policy becomes teleologically steered, evolving
within the multidimensional semantic space of its own field-theoretic ethics.
4

