Extrapolated Riemannian Curvature of Semantic
Manifolds
Flyxion
September 21, 2025
Abstract
This essay develops a formal framework for understanding seman-
tic manifolds through extrapolated Riemannian curvature, integrating
differential geometry, active inference, and second-person neuroscience.
We explore how curvature distortions in high-dimensional representa-
tional spaces underpin information loss in multimodal models and neural
synchrony in social interactions.
The manifold hypothesis serves as a
foundational principle, positing that real-world data concentrate on low-
dimensional submanifolds, enabling interpolation and generalization. We
map empirical findings from embedding connectors to an RSVP field the-
ory, where scalar capacity, vector flows, and entropy govern semantic
fidelity. Applications to therapy emphasize affective inference as a reg-
ulatory mechanism for rupture and repair, with curvature entropy as a
sociomarker for interpersonalized psychiatry. Extensions consider humor
as frame-shift resolution of mismatched manifolds, complex emotions as
higher-order inoculations, geometric hyperscanning as interbrain curva-
ture dynamics, and the ontogenetic parade as developmental curvature
trajectories. Future directions include simulations of dyadic agents and
ethical considerations for real-time relational tracking. By synthesizing
these elements, we advance a unified geometry of meaning across compu-
tation, cognition, and interaction.
Contents
1
Introduction
4
2
Semantic Manifolds and the Manifold Hypothesis
5
2.1
Core Definitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Examples of Semantic Manifolds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Extrapolated Riemannian Curvature
6
3.1
Formalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Mathematical Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1

4
Geometric Hyperscanning and Interbrain Networks
7
4.1
Discrete Curvature in Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Simulation Example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
Affective Inference in Relational Dynamics
7
5.1
Expanded on Psychotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6
Mapping to RSVP Field Theory
8
6.1
Mathematical Correspondences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.2
Functorial Correspondence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
7
Applications to Therapy and Psychiatry
11
7.1
Case Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
7.2
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
8
Future Directions
12
9
Worked Example: Separation Anxiety as Curvature Spike and
Its Reduction via Learning and Play
13
9.1
Setup: State Space, Fields, and Priors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
9.2
Dynamics: Curvature-Entropy Coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
9.3
Learning (Inoculation) Operator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
9.4
Play as Simulated Danger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
9.5
Minimal Stability Claim (Negentropic Corridor) . . . . . . . . . .
14
9.6
Developmental Vignette (Qualitative Trace) . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
9.7
Quantitative Marker (Curvature-Entropy Integral) . . . . . . . .
15
9.8
Takeaways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
10 Humor as Resolution of Mismatched Manifolds
15
10.1 Manifold Interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
10.2 Frame Shift as Pattern Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
10.3 RSVP Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
10.4 Psychological Implication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
11 Complex Emotions as Higher-Order Surprise Minimization
17
11.1 Examples of Complex Emotions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
11.2 RSVP Field Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
11.3 Category-Theoretic View
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
11.4 Sheaf-Theoretic Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
12 Taxonomy of Emotions
19
13 Categorical and Sheaf-Theoretic Correspondence
19
13.1 Objects and Morphisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
13.2 Sheaf-Theoretic Gluing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
13.3 Natural Transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
13.4 RSVP Integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2

14 The Ontogenetic Parade:
Developmental Fear as Curvature
Flow
21
14.1 Learning as Inoculation Against Surprise . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
14.2 Play as Simulated Danger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
14.3 Curvature Flow of Developmental Phobias . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
14.4 Implications for RSVP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
15 The Ontogenetic Parade:
Developmental Fear as Curvature
Flow
22
15.1 Learning as Inoculation Against Surprise . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
15.2 Play as Simulated Danger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
15.3 Curvature Flow of Developmental Phobias . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
15.4 Implications for RSVP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
15.5 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
16 Ontogenetic Parade and Geometric Hyperscanning
24
16.1 Developmental Fear Trajectories as Curvature Flows . . . . . . .
24
16.2 Hyperscanning Correlates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
16.3 Integration with RSVP Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
16.4 Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
17 Conclusions
25
18 Acknowledgements
26
A Formal Derivation of Extrapolated Curvature Bounds
26
A.1 A Jacobian (bi-Lipschitz) bound
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
A.2 A Ricci-volume comparison bound (global, curvature-controlled)
27
A.3 A Bakry-Émery (LSI/T2) bound via extrapolated curvature . . .
28
A.4 Putting the bounds together . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
A.5 A normal graph bound under reach and second fundamental form
29
A.6 Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
B Simulation Details
30
B.1
Pseudocode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
B.2
Minimal Python Snippets (Jupyter)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
B.3
Notes and Extensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
C Hyperscanning Modality Comparison
34
D Proof Sketches
35
D.1 Lyapunov Stability for Negentropic Corridors . . . . . . . . . . .
36
D.2 Entropy Bounds from Rate-Distortion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
D.3 Takeaways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3

1
Introduction
High-dimensional data in machine learning and neuroscience often exhibit sur-
prising structure: despite their apparent complexity, they frequently lie along
low-dimensional latent manifolds within the ambient space. This manifold hy-
pothesis [10, 15, 29, 6] explains the eﬀicacy of dimensionality reduction tech-
niques and the generalization capabilities of deep learning models [8]. It posits
that data requiring many variables for initial description can be captured by
fewer variables tied to the local coordinates of an underlying manifold, facilitat-
ing continuous interpolation between samples—a key to robust inference.
However, traditional similarity metrics in embeddings (e.g., cosine distance)
and correlation-based synchrony in neuroscience overlook the deeper geometric
distortions that arise when mapping between manifolds.
Curvature and en-
tropy provide critical insights into these processes, not merely as mathematical
abstractions but as socially relevant measures. In artificial intelligence, they ex-
plain interpretability failures and robustness issues; in psychiatry and therapy,
they quantify relational attunement or rupture, offering tools for mental health
interventions.
This essay extrapolates Riemannian curvature to semantic manifolds, view-
ing curvature as a measure of distortion in representational flows. This extrap-
olation reveals how mappings between manifolds—such as connectors in vision-
language models (VLMs) or coupling in interbrain networks—induce geometric
shear and entropy production. Inspired by recent geometric hyperscanning [20],
we model social interactions as dynamic reconfigurations of neural manifolds,
where transitions in synchrony reflect affective regulation rather than dysfunc-
tion.
Our framework integrates active inference [14], where affect signals coher-
ence in coupled generative systems, with an RSVP field theory (scalar capacity
Φ, vector flows v, entropy S).
We formalize connector losses as curvature-
induced entropy, sheaf gluing as patch consistency, and Bayesian comparison
as manifold interference. Extended explanations draw connections to therapy,
where curvature entropy serves as a sociomarker for rupture-repair cycles, ad-
vancing interpersonalized psychiatry [1]. Beyond clinical settings, we extend
the same formal machinery to humor as the resolution of mismatched mani-
folds, to complex emotions as higher-order recursive inoculations, to geometric
hyperscanning as interbrain curvature dynamics, and to the ontogenetic parade
as developmental modulation of curvature regulation.
The main contributions are:
1. A new definition of extrapolated curvature for semantic mappings, with
entropy bounds and sheaf-theoretic interpretations.
2. A mapping of embedding losses to RSVP fields, yielding design principles
for geometry-preserving multimodal systems.
3. Extensions to higher-order affective phenomena: humor as frame-shift res-
olution of mismatched manifolds, complex emotions as recursive inocula-
4

tion operators, geometric hyperscanning as interbrain curvature dynam-
ics, and the ontogenetic parade as developmental trajectories of curvature
regulation.
4. Applications to therapy, viewing affective inference as curvature-guided
regulation of relational manifolds.
The essay proceeds by first introducing the manifold hypothesis and defining
extrapolated curvature, then developing its application to interbrain synchrony
through geometric hyperscanning. We next turn to affective inference, showing
how curvature regulation underlies rupture and repair in relational contexts,
before mapping these dynamics into RSVP fields. Applications to therapy il-
lustrate how curvature entropy can act as a sociomarker of co-regulation, while
broader extensions connect the framework to humor as frame-shift resolution, to
complex emotions as higher-order recursive inoculations, and to the ontogenetic
parade of developmental fears as predictable curvature flows widened through
learning and play. We close with future directions, conclusions, and a review of
related work.
2
Semantic Manifolds and the Manifold Hypoth-
esis
Semantic representations—whether in language models, neural activations, or
cognitive processes—can be formalized as Riemannian manifolds equipped with
additional structures to capture dynamics and information flow.
2.1
Core Definitions
Definition 2.1 (Semantic Manifold). A semantic manifold is a quadruple M =
(X, g, Ψ, µ), where X is a smooth manifold, g is a Riemannian metric, Ψ is
a field bundle (e.g., scalar-vector fields), and µ is a probability measure with
density bounded on compact subsets.
The manifold hypothesis asserts that high-dimensional data concentrate on
such low-dimensional structures [10, 15]. This concentration reduces effective
complexity: machine learning fits subspaces rather than the full ambient space,
enabling interpolation via continuous paths [8]. Extensions like the union of
manifolds [4] account for heterogeneous data, aligning with sheaf gluing for
overlapping submanifolds.
In information geometry, these manifolds carry the Fisher metric gF , quan-
tifying sensitivity to parameter changes [5]. Under the free energy principle,
manifolds are demarcated by Markov blankets, separating internal states from
external environments [23].
Expanded, this hypothesis implies that generalization arises from preserv-
ing manifold geometry under mappings. Distortions—measured by curvature—
signal entropy production, linking to RSVP fields where Φ represents capacity,
v flows, and S dissipation.
5

2.2
Examples of Semantic Manifolds
In machine learning, token embeddings in large language models form low-
dimensional manifolds where semantically similar concepts cluster. For instance,
the embedding space of GPT-like models can be visualized as a curved surface
where paths between tokens correspond to interpolation in meaning.
In neuroscience, EEG or fMRI time series are projected into latent manifolds,
where neural states evolve along trajectories governed by dynamical systems.
Conceptual categories in cognition, such as emotions or beliefs, form semantic
manifolds where local neighborhoods represent related ideas.
Topology provides further insight: sheaf theory models how local charts
(e.g., patch embeddings) glue into global coherence. The union of manifolds
hypothesis [4] extends this, suggesting data lie on intersecting submanifolds,
with gluing conditions ensuring consistency. Geometric analyses of autoencoders
[25] show encoder-decoder pairs as approximate isometries, preserving manifold
structure.
3
Extrapolated Riemannian Curvature
To quantify distortions in semantic mappings, we define extrapolated curvature
as the deviation induced by projections between manifolds.
3.1
Formalization
Let F : (X, g) →(Y, h) be a smooth map (e.g., VLM connector). The pullback
metric is F ∗h, and the distortion tensor is DF = F ∗h −g. The extrapolated
curvature tensor is KF = RicF ∗h −Ricg, with scalar κF = Scal(F ∗h) −Scal(g).
Proposition 3.1 (Curvature and Entropy Bound). Under bounded sectional
curvature and positive reach, extrapolated curvature bounds connector entropy
production σ[F|µ].
Sketch. Curvature integrates metric distortions; entropy follows from transport
inequalities linking κF to distributional changes.
This extrapolation extends discrete curvatures like Forman-Ricci [13] to con-
tinuous manifolds, measuring how projections shear semantic geometry.
3.2
Mathematical Expansion
The Riemann tensor R captures intrinsic geometry; Ricci Ric averages it over
directions; scalar Scal contracts further. For embeddings, extrapolated curva-
ture KF quantifies how F deforms the source manifold's geometry to match the
target's.
Lemma 3.2 (Distortion and Curvature). For small ∥DF ∥, κF ≈∆g∥DF ∥+
O(∥DF ∥2), where ∆g is the Laplace-Beltrami operator.
6

Proofs involve linearization of the curvature operator under metric perturba-
tions. Category-theoretically, F is a functor between manifold categories, with
faithfulness reflecting information preservation.
(X, g)
(Y, h)
(MX, gF )
(MY , gF )
F
gF
gF
∼
=
This diagram shows curvature as a natural invariant.
4
Geometric Hyperscanning and Interbrain Net-
works
Hyperscanning simultaneously records neural signals from interacting individ-
uals, revealing interbrain synchrony [26]. Traditional metrics are descriptive;
geometric approaches offer mechanistic insights [20].
4.1
Discrete Curvature in Networks
Interbrain graphs link regions across agents, weighted by synchrony. Forman-
Ricci curvature quantifies expansion/contraction; negative values indicate bridges,
positive dense regions. Entropy of curvature distributions detects phase transi-
tions:
HRC(Gt) = −
Z
f t
RC(x) log f t
RC(x) dx.
Divergences in HRC signal rupture-repair, extending intra-brain analyses
[37, 7].
Expanded, this geometry views dyads as coupled manifolds, with curvature
flows routing information between shortest-path traversal and diffusion [2].
4.2
Simulation Example
Consider a toy dyad modeled as small-world graphs with rewiring probability p.
As p increases from 0 (lattice) to 1 (random), HRC diverges around p ≈10−2,
marking a transition from segregated to integrated topology. This mirrors social
shifts from misalignment to attunement.
Topological data analysis adds persistent homology to distinguish transient
vs. lasting structures, complementing curvature entropy.
5
Affective Inference in Relational Dynamics
Affect regulates dyadic coherence, signaling narrative alignment [21].
Under
active inference, curvature entropy informs belief updates about shared states.
7

In therapy, entropy peaks mark ruptures; repairs restore low-entropy gluing.
This extends to groups via hierarchical manifolds, fusing multimodal cues in
generative models.
5.1
Expanded on Psychotherapy
Rupture-repair cycles are foundational to therapeutic alliance. Curvature en-
tropy quantifies misattunement [3], with peaks predicting breakdown and de-
clines indicating resolution. Case study: therapist-client dyad where entropy
spikes during conflict, guiding intervention.
Mathematically, two agents minimize variational free energy coupled by cur-
vature signals:
F[π] = Eπ[DKL(q||p)] + H[˜q],
where curvature contributes to the entropy term H.
Ethically, real-time detection requires consent and interpretability, avoiding
reduction of relational autonomy to geometric metrics.
6
Mapping to RSVP Field Theory
RSVP models representations as fields: scalar Φ (capacity), vector v (flows),
entropy S (dissipation).
Connectors are entropy-respecting functors; KNOR
estimates global shear (S increase), patch-loss local tears.
6.1
Mathematical Correspondences
The relationship between curvature, entropy, and stability in RSVP admits
several precise correspondences:
Bi-Lipschitz bounds and Lyapunov stability.
Mappings F : (X, g) →
(Y, h) between semantic manifolds preserve negentropic structure when they
are bi-Lipschitz. Formally, for constants 0 < c < C < ∞,
c dX(x1, x2) ≤dY (F(x1), F(x2)) ≤C dX(x1, x2).
This ensures bounded distortion, corresponding to Lyapunov stability of seman-
tic flows. Violation of the bound signals exponential divergence of trajectories,
i.e. entropic rupture.
Rate-distortion and entropy budgets.
Let R(D) denote the minimal code
rate required for average distortion D. Within RSVP, entropy S provides the
distortion budget, so that
R(D) ≈Smax −S(D),
linking compression trade-offs directly to curvature-induced entropy produc-
tion. This expresses how information flow is constrained by entropic budgets in
semantic manifolds.
8

Restricted isometry and negentropic corridors.
A mapping F satisfies
the (δ, k)-restricted isometry property if
(1 −δ)∥x∥2 ≤∥F(x)∥2 ≤(1 + δ)∥x∥2
for all k-sparse vectors x. In RSVP terms, this corresponds to the preservation
of low-dimensional negentropic submanifolds—"corridors'' where semantic flows
remain coherent despite high-dimensional embedding.
Empirical diagnostics.
Neighbor divergence rates of 40-60% indicate en-
tropic shear: local distortion of semantic neighborhoods without total collapse.
Procrustes alignment failures correspond to irreversible entropy production,
where no orthogonal correction can restore manifold correspondence.
Design principles.
Curvature regularization should be imposed to minimize
entropy growth S, constraining flows to negentropic task-aware routes. This en-
tails balancing global smoothness with local adaptability to preserve coherence.
Predictive markers.
Conditional neighborhood-overlap ratios (KNOR) of-
fer superior prediction of error loci in semantic projection.
Ablating negen-
tropic corridors selectively reduces relevant information, demonstrating their
functional necessity.
Implications.
These correspondences highlight a dual-use property: geomet-
ric diagnostics serve both interpretability in artificial systems and the analysis
of human cognition, where projection through semantic corridors is inherently
lossy. Humans act as projectors constrained by curvature and entropy, embody-
ing the same trade-offs that govern artificial models.
6.2
Functorial Correspondence
In categorical terms, semantic connectors are interpreted as functors between
RSVP categories. Let CRSVP denote the category whose objects are semantic
manifolds (X, g, Φ, v, S) and whose morphisms are entropy-respecting maps pre-
serving scalar capacity and vector flow up to bounded distortion. A connector
F is then a functor
F : CRSVP →CRSVP
such that:
• F preserves composition, ensuring consistent chaining of semantic trans-
formations.
• F respects entropy budgets, i.e. S(F(x)) ≤S(x) + ∆for some bounded
∆.
• F preserves negentropic corridors as subobjects, corresponding to restricted
isometries.
9

Sheaf-theoretically, connectors induce morphisms between sheaves of seman-
tic sections over manifolds, with gluing conditions enforcing coherence across
overlaps. Thus, functoriality provides the categorical guarantee that local se-
mantic projections extend to globally interpretable structures, while curvature
quantifies the entropic cost of this extension.
(X, g, Φ, v, S)
(Y, h, ˜Φ, ˜v, ˜S)
(X′, g′, Φ′, v′, S′)
(Y ′, h′, ˜Φ′, ˜v′, ˜S′)
F
G
G′
F ′
with G′ ◦F = F ′ ◦G.
Interpretation:
F preserves composition of semantic flows (morphisms), so
chaining transformations on X corresponds to chaining their images on Y .
F(U ∩V )
F(U)
F(V )
G(F(U)) ×G(F (U∩V )) G(F(V ))
ρU∩V →U
ρU∩V →V
F♯
F♯
Interpretation: The induced map F♯on sections respects restrictions and gluing:
local semantic sections push forward to compatible sections, so local coherence
becomes global coherence after projection.
(X, g, Φ, v, S)
(Y, h, ˜Φ, ˜v, ˜S)
F
Jac JF
∆S := ˜S −S =
Z
X
log JF dµ,
∥DF ∥:= ∥F∗h−g∥,
KF :=RicF∗h−Ricg.
Lemma (sandwich). If F is bi-Lipschitz on supp µ with constant L ≥1, then
−d
2 log L ≤∆S ≤
d
2 log L.
Stability (corridor). If on a patch U, ∥KF ∥op ≤η and ∥DF ∥≤ε (with small
second fundamental form), then
∆S|U =
Z
U
1
2 tr(g−1DF ) dµ + O(ε2),
and
∥KF ∥= O(ε),
so entropy production is first order in metric distortion and curvature drift is
small—i.e., a negentropic corridor.
Nbr(X; k)
Nbr(Y ; k)
Pairs(X)
Pairs(Y )
Nbr(F )
π
˜π
F ×F
10

Interpretation: Neighborhood order is functorially transported. Breakage here
(low KNOR) diagnoses global shear. Conditional KNOR (with task context)
restricts π to relevant subobjects, improving error prediction.
7
Applications to Therapy and Psychiatry
Curvature entropy offers a promising framework for quantifying the dynamics
of therapeutic interactions. As sociomarkers, curvature-based measures track
co-regulation across interacting agents [1], aligning with the view that psy-
chopathology often arises from persistent patterns of misattunement rather than
from isolated dysfunctions [3]. By capturing rupture-repair cycles in relational
geometry, curvature entropy can inform both clinical assessment and interven-
tion design.
7.1
Case Studies
Dyadic synchrony.
In one-to-one therapy settings, the temporal profile of
curvature entropy between therapist and client can be used as a quantitative
predictor of alliance strength. Low-entropy intervals correspond to stable align-
ment of affective and cognitive states, while entropy spikes mark moments of
rupture. Tracking these fluctuations allows therapists to identify critical win-
dows for repair and to evaluate whether interventions restore synchrony effec-
tively.
Group dynamics.
Family and group therapy contexts can be modeled as
hierarchical manifolds, where subgroups (e.g., parent-child dyads) glue into
higher-level relational structures. Here, curvature encodes not only dyadic co-
herence but also the consistency of the overall group configuration. Negative
curvature edges highlight structural bridges or tensions between subsystems,
offering clinically interpretable markers of group stability or fragmentation.
Quantitative thresholds.
Entropy distributions enable the derivation of
thresholds that separate expected fluctuation from clinically significant rupture.
These thresholds can be validated in controlled trials, where predictive validity
is established by correlating entropy dynamics with independent measures such
as symptom trajectories or therapeutic outcome scores. Such thresholds could
function as real-time indicators of when a therapeutic system risks destabiliza-
tion.
Ethical considerations.
The clinical promise of curvature-based monitoring
is inseparable from its ethical risks. Continuous tracking of relational dynamics
raises profound questions about privacy, autonomy, and the potential pathol-
ogization of ordinary variability in interaction. To be empowering rather than
reductive, metrics must be deployed transparently, with the explicit aim of sup-
porting patient agency and mutual understanding. The challenge is to ensure
11

that quantitative tools augment, rather than replace, the interpretive judgment
of therapists and the lived experiences of clients.
7.2
Summary
Taken together, these case studies illustrate how curvature entropy could trans-
form psychiatry into a discipline of interpersonalized medicine, where diagnosis
and treatment are grounded in the real-time geometry of human connection. By
operationalizing rupture and repair as measurable transitions, this framework
offers a bridge between the mathematical language of manifolds and the clinical
realities of care.
8
Future Directions
The framework developed here opens several avenues for theoretical expansion,
computational implementation, and clinical translation. Each strand deepens
the integration of curvature, entropy, and manifold geometry into a broader
account of semantic and social dynamics.
• Theoretical. A natural direction is the development of higher categor-
ical and topos-theoretic structures that formalize multimodal manifolds.
Sheaf-theoretic gluing already provides a local-to-global account of se-
mantic coherence; extending this to higher topos models would enable the
systematic treatment of overlaps across modalities, agents, and temporal
scales. Such a framework could capture not only pairwise alignments but
also the higher-order homotopies required for collective meaning-making.
• Computational. On the algorithmic side, recursive dyadic simulations
provide a testbed for curvature-entropy dynamics.
Implementations in
Jupyter notebooks can demonstrate proof-of-concept with synthetic hy-
perscanning data, while high-performance computing platforms can scale
these models to populations of agents. By embedding curvature entropy
as a streamed observable in active inference loops, one can directly test
whether rupture-repair cycles emerge spontaneously under the proposed
dynamics.
• Clinical. Curvature entropy offers a candidate biomarker—or sociomarker—
for guiding therapeutic interventions.
Pilot trials in psychiatry could
test whether rupture and repair dynamics, as indexed by entropy peaks
and troughs, align with subjective reports of attunement or disconnec-
tion. Longitudinal studies could investigate whether stabilizing curvature
dynamics corresponds to durable improvements in relational resilience,
thereby informing personalized treatment strategies.
• Societal and Ethical. As curvature-based relational tracking becomes
feasible in real time, the question of governance becomes paramount.
Alignment cannot be reduced merely to synchrony; autonomy requires
12

respecting moments of divergence as much as convergence. Ethical frame-
works must secure informed consent, intelligible feedback, and safeguards
against coercion or misuse. Relational AI systems should be designed not
as instruments of hidden influence but as transparent mediators of mutual
understanding.
Beyond dyads, these directions point toward collective behavior, where geom-
etry distributes across scales. In this extension, networks of agents form nested
manifolds, with curvature signatures tracking phase transitions in group coher-
ence, institutional dynamics, and even societal-level meaning systems. Scaling
the present framework to these higher levels could unify cognitive, clinical, and
cultural domains under a single geometric account of relational stability and
transformation.
9
Worked Example: Separation Anxiety as Cur-
vature Spike and Its Reduction via Learning
and Play
9.1
Setup: State Space, Fields, and Priors
Let the child's contextual manifold be
X = S × C,
where S are self-states and C are caregiver contexts. Consider the caregiver-
present/absent axis c ∈{0, 1}, embedded as a geodesic coordinate on X. The
RSVP fields are (Φt, vt, St) with informational metric gt.
Baseline prior.
High certainty on caregiver presence:
µ0(c = 1) ≈1,
µ0(c = 0) ≈0.
Surprise.
At separation (trial t), surprise is defined as
St = −log pt(c = 0).
Local curvature.
On the "separation ridge" U ⊂X,
κt := ∥Ric(gt)|U∥op.
Corridor width.
Robustness at the ridge is wt > 0 (larger is safer).
13

9.2
Dynamics: Curvature-Entropy Coupling
We model the spike at separation and its stabilization via discrete-time coupling:
St+1 = St + α(St −¯S)
|
{z
}
shock
−βwt
|{z}
buffer
,
κt+1 = κt + γ(St −¯S)
|
{z
}
tightening
−
δwt
|{z}
softening
,
wt+1 = wt +
ηΦt
|{z}
capacity gain
−
ζκt
|{z}
pinching
,
Φt+1 = Φt +
λ E[∆log pt]
|
{z
}
learning inoculation
−ρ 1{St > τ}
|
{z
}
overload
.
Parameters α, β, γ, δ, η, ζ, λ, ρ > 0 and ¯S is a target surprise baseline.
Interpretation.
A sudden separation (c = 0) increases St, tightening curva-
ture κt+1 (the "fear ridge") unless buffered by wt. Learning increases Φt, which
widens wt+1 and reduces both St+1 and κt+1 over trials.
9.3
Learning (Inoculation) Operator
Learning adjusts priors toward calibrated expectations:
qt+1 = I(qt) = (1 −αL)qt + αL pt(c | safe return),
with αL ∈(0, 1). In RSVP terms,
Φt+1 −Φt ∝DKL(qt ∥qt+1),
so larger updates widen capacity ("explanatory slack" around the ridge).
9.4
Play as Simulated Danger
Play introduces safe micro-separations: a perturbation distribution qplay(∆c)
with bounded entropy cost,
supp(qplay) ⊂{∆c : σ(∆c) < σc},
σc ≪σclinical.
Play injects repeated low-amplitude curvature pulses δκt with informative re-
turns, accelerating Φ-gain and widening w without overloading S.
9.5
Minimal Stability Claim (Negentropic Corridor)
Let xt = (St, κt, wt, Φt). Linearizing near a desired operating point x⋆(low S,
small κ, wide w, adequate Φ), the Jacobian J of the update map has block
structure with:
∂St+1
∂wt
= −β,
∂κt+1
∂wt
= −δ,
∂wt+1
∂κt
= −ζ,
∂wt+1
∂Φt
= η,
∂Φt+1
∂St
= −ρ δτ.
14

Proposition (sketch).
If βδ > αγ (buffering dominates shock-tightening),
ηλ is suﬀiciently large (learning drives width), and ρ enforces overload satura-
tion, then ρ(J) < 1. Hence xt →x⋆: repeated safe separations plus learning
produce a stable, widened corridor.
9.6
Developmental Vignette (Qualitative Trace)
• Week 0 (baseline): First daycare drop-off ⇒S ↑, κ↑, w↓. Distress.
• Weeks 1-2: Peek-a-boo, brief room exits ⇒small curvature pulses with
quick resolution. Φ↑, w↑, S ↓.
• Weeks 3-4: Longer separations with rituals ⇒Φ crosses threshold, κ
flattens, w robust.
• Week 6: Novel caregivers/rooms produce modest S, quickly absorbed.
Calm behavior and exploratory play.
9.7
Quantitative Marker (Curvature-Entropy Integral)
Session-level stability score:
Jsession =
Z
session
(αSt + γκt) dt −
Z
session
(βwt + ηΦt) dt.
Protocols aim for ∆Jsession < 0 across sessions.
Play boosts the second
integral without inflating the first, ensuring monotone improvement.
9.8
Takeaways
• Separation anxiety is a curvature-entropy pinch at a predictable ridge.
• Learning is inoculation: priors absorb structured variability, increasing Φ
and widening w.
• Play is simulated danger: bounded perturbations accelerate corridor widen-
ing without overload.
• Safety is formalized: σ(∆c) < σc prevents entropic blowouts; stability
follows from βδ > αγ and suﬀicient ηλ.
10
Humor as Resolution of Mismatched Mani-
folds
Humor can be formalized as the resolution of mismatched semantic manifolds
via frame-shift pattern matching.
A joke establishes a primary interpretive
manifold and then abruptly induces a shift to a competing manifold, forcing
the cognitive system to reconcile divergent metrics. Laughter is modeled as the
entropy release that accompanies this reconciliation.
15

10.1
Manifold Interference
Let semantic context be a Riemannian manifold (M, g) with probability measure
µ over interpretations. A joke sets up a primary manifold M1 with metric g1,
then abruptly induces a shift to M2 with metric g2. The humor event occurs at
the interference region
H = M1 ⋔M2 = {x ∈M1 ∩M2 : g1(x) ̸= g2(x)}.
Resolution requires a mapping F : M1 →M2 minimizing distortion while
preserving incongruity:
∆g = F g2−g1.
The laughter response is modeled as entropy release:
L = σ[F|µ] ∝
Z
H
log det(I + g−1
1 ∆g) dµ.
10.2
Frame Shift as Pattern Matching
Let {Fi} denote interpretive frames, each a sheaf of local patches glued into a
manifold of meaning. The punchline acts as a functor
P : Sheaf(M1) →Sheaf(M2),
reinterpreting a section s under a different gluing law.
Humor arises when the transition function is non-trivial but still recogniz-
able:
t12(s) ̸= s,
d(s, t12(s)) < ϵ.
That is, the shifted pattern is divergent yet matchable.
10.3
RSVP Mapping
In RSVP notation:
• Φ: scalar capacity — potential to hold multiple manifold interpretations.
• v: vector flows — trajectory following one manifold then redirected to
another.
• S: entropy — mismatch cost when g1 ̸= g2.
Humor is a negentropic corridor where divergent trajectories re-align, releas-
ing entropy as affective resolution:
Humor(M1, M2) = min
F

∥DF ∥: ∆S(F) > 0
	
,
where DF is the distortion tensor and ∆S the entropy gain.
16

10.4
Psychological Implication
• Setup: low-entropy expectation on M1.
• Punchline: sudden high curvature between M1 and M2.
• Resolution: recognition of overlap, entropy released as laughter.
This reframes incongruity theory in geometric-information terms: humor
is the controlled rupture and repair of semantic manifold coherence, where the
"funny" intensity corresponds to the curvature-entropy spike and its subsequent
dissipation.
11
Complex Emotions as Higher-Order Surprise
Minimization
We extend the recursive inoculation framework to model complex emotions as
meta-inoculations against anticipated classes of surprise. Let I denote the in-
oculation operator acting on a prior q, and Id its d-fold composition:
q(d)(x) = Id(q)(x),
where the recursion depth d encodes the degree of preparation for higher-
order uncertainties. Basic emotions correspond to d = 1 (first-order inocula-
tion), while complex emotions emerge for d ≥2.
11.1
Examples of Complex Emotions
Guilt.
Formally, guilt is a depth-2 inoculation conditioned on counterfactual
priors µ′ over actions not taken:
qguilt(x) = I2 q(x)
 µ′ ̸= µ

.
Interpretation: guilt contracts action manifolds via negative curvature, redi-
recting flows v toward reparative pathways.
Awe.
Awe corresponds to high-capacity expansion of Φ, producing singular
curvature and volumetric expansion:
κawe →−∞,
Vol(M) ↑.
Interpretation: awe arises from epistemic shock, reorganizing the semantic
manifold under low predictability.
17

Nostalgia.
Nostalgia is recursive inoculation against surprise in temporal re-
constructions:
q(d)
nost(xt) = Id q(xt−k)

,
k > 0.
Interpretation: nostalgia retroactively glues present states to past embed-
dings, reducing entropy by aligning current priors with remembered distribu-
tions.
11.2
RSVP Field Mapping
• Φ (capacity): Upregulated in awe, downregulated in guilt.
• v (flows): Retrocausal in nostalgia, contractive in guilt.
• S (entropy): Transiently increased in awe, suppressed in nostalgia, rupture-
repair dynamics in guilt.
11.3
Category-Theoretic View
Let E be the category of emotional states, with objects = manifolds indexed by
recursion depth d, and morphisms = inoculation operators:
Id : Mi →Mj.
• Guilt = morphism conditioned on counterfactual sheaves.
• Awe = colimit expansion in E.
• Nostalgia = pullback functor along temporal fibrations.
11.4
Sheaf-Theoretic Integration
Sheaves F over Memo encode local patches of affect:
• Guilt = failed gluing, where local coherence cannot extend to a global
section.
• Awe = successful gluing of disjoint patches via curvature blow-up.
• Nostalgia = retroactive gluing aligning past and present stalks through
temporal restriction maps.
18

Table 1: Recursive inoculation operators and their affective correspondences.
Emotion
Recursive depth
d
Operator form
Interpretation
Fear
d = 1
q(1)(x) = I(q)(x)
First-order
inoculation against
immediate surprise.
Guilt
d = 2
q(2)(x) = I2 q(x) |
µ′ ̸= µ

Second-order
inoculation
conditioned on
counterfactual
priors.
Awe
variable d
κ →
−∞, Vol(M) ↑
Curvature
singularity inducing
expansion of
semantic capacity.
Nostalgia
d > 1
q(d)(xt) =
Id q(xt−k)

, k > 0
Recursive
inoculation over
past states,
retroactive
temporal gluing.
12
Taxonomy of Emotions
13
Categorical and Sheaf-Theoretic Correspon-
dence
13.1
Objects and Morphisms
We treat each affective state as a semantic manifold object:
E = (X, g, Φ, v, S),
where X is the underlying state space, g the induced Riemannian metric, Φ
scalar capacity, v vector flows, and S entropy flux.
Recursive self-inoculation is formalized as a morphism in the category Aﬀect:
Id : E →E′,
where d denotes recursion depth. Composition Id ◦Id′ corresponds to layered
anticipation (e.g. guilt as a second-order inoculation against surprise about one's
own agency).
19

13.2
Sheaf-Theoretic Gluing
Let {Ui} be an open cover of the cognitive manifold (perceptual frames, memory
traces, social priors). Emotions arise when local inoculation operators Id
i defined
on each patch fail or succeed to glue consistently on overlaps Ui ∩Uj.
• Successful gluing: coherence (joy, humor).
• Partial gluing with high-entropy boundaries: ambivalence, anxiety.
• Failure to glue (no global section): grief, despair.
Thus, curvature entropy HRC functions as an obstruction measure in the
Čech cohomology of affective sheaves.
13.3
Natural Transformations
We formalize affective dynamics as functors
F, G : Context →Aﬀect,
mapping situational contexts to emotional manifolds. A natural transformation
η : F ⇒G
represents the curvature-induced shift of emotional framing (e.g. awe as η from
a low-dimensional to a high-dimensional embedding functor).
13.4
RSVP Integration
The RSVP fields (Φ, v, S) provide the semantic payload of these categorical
mappings:
• Φ tracked under adjunctions (capacity preserved or amplified),
• v transported functorially as vector flow of inference,
• S bounded by curvature distortion as a naturality condition.
Formally:
ηx : F(x) →G(x)
s.t.
S(F(x)) −S(G(x)) = ∆κ,
with ∆κ the extrapolated curvature difference on overlaps.
Summary
This categorical embedding yields the following correspondences:
• Emotions = sheaf sections (local inoculation rules).
• Mismatch = cohomological obstruction (rupture, grief).
• Resolution = natural transformation (humor, joy).
• Recursive depth = morphism composition (fear, guilt, awe).
20

14
The Ontogenetic Parade: Developmental Fear
as Curvature Flow
Developmental psychology identifies a predictable trajectory of childhood fears,
often described as the ontogenetic parade: fears emerge, plateau, and decline in a
temporally structured sequence. Infants fear loud noises and separation, young
children fear animals or the dark, and older children develop more abstract social
fears such as embarrassment or failure.
This sequence reflects not arbitrary
variation but systematic regulation of surprise across developmental time.
14.1
Learning as Inoculation Against Surprise
We formalize learning as the recursive inoculation of generative models against
future surprise. Let St denote the entropy of predictions at time t over a de-
velopmental state space X.
Learning corresponds to constructing a control
functional I such that
St+1 ≤St −I(St),
where I represents the inoculative effect of experience: the integration of predic-
tion errors into the manifold so that similar perturbations produce less curvature
in the future. Each developmental fear follows an emergence-plateau-decline
curve because inoculation progressively smooths the local semantic manifold,
lowering sectional curvature κ around the fear stimulus.
14.2
Play as Simulated Danger
Play provides a structured domain for safe surprise: simulated exposures that
mirror dangerous conditions while keeping actual harm minimal. Formally, let
P denote a projection functor from a danger manifold (X, g, S) to a safe play
manifold (Y, h, ˜S), preserving curvature signs but scaling entropy production:
κP(y) = α · κ(x),
0 < α < 1.
Here play functions as an entropy-scaled rehearsal space, reducing surprise
through recursive approximation. Children who play with fears (e.g. monster
games, hide-and-seek in the dark) effectively simulate danger at reduced curva-
ture, accelerating inoculation.
14.3
Curvature Flow of Developmental Phobias
Each phobic trajectory in the ontogenetic parade can be modeled as a curvature
flow on the semantic manifold:
dκ
dt = −βS + γP,
where β quantifies the inoculative effect of experience and γ the accelerant effect
of play. Emergence corresponds to a spike in κ, plateau to the period where
21

β and γ balance incoming entropy, and decline to the smoothing of curvature
as fears resolve. Failure of this flow—where κ remains high or γ is absent—
yields persistence of childhood fears into maladaptive adulthood, such as anxiety
disorders.
14.4
Implications for RSVP
Within the RSVP framework, the ontogenetic parade exemplifies recursive self-
inoculation: the scalar field Φ encodes latent capacity for prediction, vector
field v captures affective and exploratory flows, and entropy S measures the
cost of mismatch.
Learning and play jointly smooth the trajectory of κ(t),
ensuring that developmental fears operate as temporary scaffolds rather than
permanent pathologies.
Ontogenetic phobias thus become signatures of cur-
vature regulation—necessary oscillations that ultimately expand Φ and deepen
negentropic corridors for future cognition.
15
The Ontogenetic Parade: Developmental Fear
as Curvature Flow
Developmental psychology identifies a predictable trajectory of childhood fears,
often described as the ontogenetic parade [27, 16]. Fears emerge, plateau, and
decline in a temporally structured sequence: infants fear loud noises and sepa-
ration, young children fear animals or the dark, and older children develop more
abstract social fears such as embarrassment or failure. This sequence reflects not
arbitrary variation but systematic regulation of surprise across developmental
time [12].
15.1
Learning as Inoculation Against Surprise
We formalize learning as the recursive inoculation of generative models against
future surprise [28]. Let St denote the entropy of predictions at time t over a
developmental state space X. Learning corresponds to constructing a control
functional I such that
St+1 ≤St −I(St),
where I represents the inoculative effect of experience: the integration of predic-
tion errors into the manifold so that similar perturbations produce less curvature
in the future. Each developmental fear follows an emergence-plateau-decline
curve because inoculation progressively smooths the local semantic manifold,
lowering sectional curvature κ around the fear stimulus.
15.2
Play as Simulated Danger
Play provides a structured domain for safe surprise: simulated exposures that
mirror dangerous conditions while keeping actual harm minimal. This insight
22

is supported by evolutionary perspectives on risky play, where thrilling expe-
riences are argued to have anti-phobic effects [32]. Formally, let P denote a
projection functor from a danger manifold (X, g, S) to a safe play manifold
(Y, h, ˜S), preserving curvature signs but scaling entropy production:
κP(y) = α · κ(x),
0 < α < 1.
Here play functions as an entropy-scaled rehearsal space, reducing surprise
through recursive approximation. Children who play with fears (e.g. monster
games, hide-and-seek in the dark) effectively simulate danger at reduced curva-
ture, accelerating inoculation.
15.3
Curvature Flow of Developmental Phobias
Each phobic trajectory in the ontogenetic parade can be modeled as a curvature
flow on the semantic manifold:
dκ
dt = −βS + γP,
where β quantifies the inoculative effect of experience and γ the accelerant effect
of play. Emergence corresponds to a spike in κ, plateau to the period where
β and γ balance incoming entropy, and decline to the smoothing of curvature
as fears resolve. Failure of this flow—where κ remains high or γ is absent—
yields persistence of childhood fears into maladaptive adulthood, such as anxiety
disorders [22].
15.4
Implications for RSVP
Within the RSVP framework, the ontogenetic parade exemplifies recursive self-
inoculation: the scalar field Φ encodes latent capacity for prediction, vector
field v captures affective and exploratory flows, and entropy S measures the
cost of mismatch.
Learning and play jointly smooth the trajectory of κ(t),
ensuring that developmental fears operate as temporary scaffolds rather than
permanent pathologies.
Ontogenetic phobias thus become signatures of cur-
vature regulation—necessary oscillations that ultimately expand Φ and deepen
negentropic corridors for future cognition.
15.5
Related Work
Systematic reviews highlight the developmental progression of normal fears [27,
17], as well as the mechanisms by which such fears may persist or evolve into
pathological forms [28, 22]. Field and Davey [12] emphasize the ontogenetic
pathogenesis of fears, while Sandseter and Kennair [32] stress the role of play as
a natural anti-phobic mechanism. These perspectives converge with our RSVP
interpretation: developmental fears reflect a necessary parade of curvature flows,
progressively smoothed by learning and play.
23

16
Ontogenetic Parade and Geometric Hyper-
scanning
16.1
Developmental Fear Trajectories as Curvature Flows
The ontogenetic parade describes the predictable emergence, plateau, and de-
cline of normal childhood fears across development. In our framework, these
trajectories correspond to curvature spikes and subsequent relaxation along af-
fective manifolds. Each fear episode can be modeled as a local ridge of positive
curvature κt on the manifold E = (X, g, Φ, v, S), with entropy St signaling the
intensity of surprise.
The decline of fears corresponds to corridor widening wt and scalar capacity
growth Φt, driven by recursive self-inoculation operators Id.
Thus, the de-
velopmental cascade can be viewed as a sequence of curvature-entropy pulses
smoothed through learning and play.
16.2
Hyperscanning Correlates
Geometric hyperscanning studies show that interbrain synchrony exhibits fluc-
tuations in curvature entropy HRC(Gt) during social interaction. We hypothe-
size that ontogenetic fears manifest as systematic synchrony patterns when child
and caregiver jointly traverse these affective ridges.
• Separation anxiety: high synchrony curvature during caregiver-child
separations, marked by entropy spikes and repair cycles.
• Stranger anxiety: curvature concentration on social priors, measurable
as increased edge curvature in interbrain graphs during unfamiliar encoun-
ters.
• Specific phobias: localized ridges in sensory submanifolds, correspond-
ing to task-specific synchrony disruptions in hyperscanning.
16.3
Integration with RSVP Fields
The RSVP decomposition clarifies these dynamics:
• Φ (capacity): expands as the child learns to absorb variability (inocula-
tion).
• v (flows): capture the caregiver-child co-regulation dynamics observable
in synchrony.
• S (entropy): curvature-induced surges reflect rupture; subsequent decay
reflects repair.
Hyperscanning thereby provides empirical signatures of the ontogenetic pa-
rade: curvature spikes in synchrony metrics track developmental fears, while
learning and play smooth these spikes into stable, low-entropy corridors.
24

16.4
Implications
This synthesis suggests that the ontogenetic parade can be understood as a
geometric and relational process, where caregiver-child dyads act as coupled
manifolds whose curvature dynamics gradually flatten through recursive inocu-
lation. Hyperscanning offers a direct empirical probe of this process, revealing
how developmental fears are regulated in real time by social synchrony and play.
17
Conclusions
Building on formal and empirical insights, this framework rethinks affect as a
regulatory signal that modulates generative coupling across semantic and social
manifolds. Curvature and entropy provide geometric invariants for tracking rup-
ture, repair, and alignment, embedding affective processes in policy posteriors
[9] and steering trajectories toward coherence.
Our extensions show that distinct affective phenomena can be formalized in
this unified language. Humor emerges as the resolution of mismatched manifolds
via frame-shift pattern matching, where entropy spikes collapse into laughter as
a negentropic corridor. Complex emotions such as guilt, awe, and nostalgia arise
as higher-order recursive inoculations, captured categorically by morphisms in
the Aﬀect category and measured sheaf-theoretically as gluing successes or fail-
ures across local patches. This taxonomy situates basic and complex emotions
within the same recursive geometry of surprise minimization.
Geometric hyperscanning extends these insights to the relational level: in-
terbrain synchrony tracks curvature-entropy flows during dyadic interactions,
with repair cycles marking successful co-regulation. Integration with the onto-
genetic parade highlights how childhood fears appear as systematic curvature
spikes in caregiver-child manifolds, gradually flattened through learning and
play as recursive inoculation builds capacity and widens corridors of safety.
Together, these findings suggest that affect is best understood not as a set
of discrete states but as curvature dynamics within coupled semantic manifolds.
Psychiatric risk then becomes the geometry of mismatch between expected and
encountered manifolds—testable via simulations and measurable via hyperscan-
ning. Ethically, translational applications must prioritize privacy, autonomy,
and empowerment, ensuring that curvature metrics guide supportive interven-
tions rather than pathologizing variability.
By integrating humor, complex emotions, developmental trajectories, and
relational synchrony within the RSVP field formalism, we advance a unified
geometry of meaning.
This geometry links computation, cognition, and in-
teraction, offering a principled basis for operationalizing second-person active
inference across science, therapy, and care.
Final Note.
Across these domains, a common pattern emerges: affective life
can be understood as curvature regulation in coupled semantic manifolds. Hu-
mor resolves mismatched manifolds through frame-shift pattern matching; com-
25

plex emotions such as guilt, awe, and nostalgia instantiate higher-order recursive
inoculations; geometric hyperscanning demonstrates these dynamics in real-time
interbrain synchrony; and the ontogenetic parade illustrates how developmental
fears trace predictable curvature flows that are widened through learning and
play. Taken together, these threads suggest a unifying RSVP geometry of af-
fect, where curvature, entropy, and capacity jointly structure the evolution of
meaning, emotion, and relational life.
18
Acknowledgements
Our framework draws on traditions in geometry, neuroscience, and computation.
Manifold Hypothesis.
Fefferman et al. [10]; Gorban and Tyukin [15]; Olah
[29]; Cayton [6]; Chollet [8]; Brown et al. [4]; Lee [25].
Information Geometry and Inference.
Caticha [5]; Kirchhoff et al. [23];
Friston et al. [14].
Discrete Curvature.
Forman [13]; Ollivier [30]; Samal et al. [31]; Weber et
al. [37]; Chatterjee et al. [7].
Hyperscanning.
Montague et al. [26]; Hakim et al. [18]; Hamilton [19]; Adel
et al. [1]; Hinrichs et al. [21, 20].
Network Dynamics.
Avena-Koenigsberger et al. [2]; Steyn-Ross and Steyn-
Ross [34]; Znaidi et al. [38]; Kulkarni and Bassett [24]; Sporns [33]; Weber [36];
Topping et al. [35]; Fesser and Weber [11].
A
Formal Derivation of Extrapolated Curvature
Bounds
We quantify the "entropy production" of a connector F : (X, g, µ) →(Y, h) by
the differential entropy change of the pushforward ν := F#µ relative to the
Riemannian volumes, or by the relative entropy D(ν∥volh) when a reference
density is fixed. Throughout, X, Y are compact, connected, d-dimensional C2
Riemannian manifolds with:
reach(X) ≥τ > 0,
|Kg| ≤K0, |Kh| ≤K0,
inj(X), inj(Y ) ≥i0 > 0,
and probability measures µ = ρ volg with ρ bounded and bounded away from 0
on supp(µ). We write JF (x) for the Riemannian Jacobian of F, i.e. F (volh)=JF volg.
Recall the distortion tensor and extrapolated curvature:
DF := F
h−g,
KF :=RicF h−Ricg,
κF :=Scal(F h)−Scal(g).
26

A.1
A Jacobian (bi-Lipschitz) bound
Assumption A.1 (Bi-Lipschitz connector). There exists L ≥1 such that for
all x ∈X and v ∈TxX,
L−1 gx(v, v) ≤F hx(v,v) ≤L gx(v,v).
Equivalently, the singular values of dFx lie in [L−1/2, L1/2].
Lemma A.1 (Jacobian sandwich). Under Assumption A.1, for all x ∈X,
L−d/2 ≤JF (x) ≤Ld/2.
Sketch. In orthonormal g-frames, JF (x) = √det Gx where Gx := g−1
x F hx has
eigenvalues in [L−1, L]. Hence det Gx ∈[L−d, Ld].
Proposition A.2 (Deterministic entropy bound via Jacobian). Let h(·) denote
differential entropy w.r.t. Riemannian volume. Then
h(ν) −h(µ) =
Z
X
log JF (x) dµ(x),
and under Assumption A.1, −d
2 log L ≤h(ν) −h(µ) ≤
d
2 log L.
Sketch. Change of variables: ν = F#µ has density ρν(y) = P
x:F (x)=y ρ(x)/JF (x)
a.e. For injective F (guaranteed locally by positive reach/injectivity), this re-
duces to ρν(F(x)) = ρ(x)/JF (x). Hence h(ν) = −
R
ρν log ρν volh = −
R
ρ log ρ volg+
R
log JF dµ. Bound by Lemma A.1.
Interpretation.
Entropy production is controlled by the log-Jacobian. Bi-
Lipschitz regularity (hence small metric distortion) yields small entropy change,
matching the intuition that near-isometries preserve neighborhood structure and
capacity.
A.2
A Ricci-volume comparison bound (global, curvature-
controlled)
Curvature bounds control volume distortion of geodesic balls (Bishop-Gromov),
hence densities and entropies of pushforwards concentrated in such balls.
Assumption A.2 (Support and radius). supp(µ) ⊂Bg(x0, R) with R < i0,
and F(Bg(x0, R)) ⊂Bh(y0, bR) with bR < i0.
Lemma A.3 (Bishop-Gromov volume distortion). If Ricg ≥−(d −1)k and
Rich ≤(d −1)bk for k, bk ≥0, then for all 0 < r ≤R and a.e. x,
volh
 Bh(F(x), αr)

volg
 Bg(x, r)

≤C(d, k, bk, R, bR) αd,
∀α ∈(0, 1],
with C explicit via model spaces.
27

Proposition A.4 (Entropy bound via Ricci comparison). Under Assump-
tions A.1 and A.2,
h(ν) −h(µ) ≤d
2 log L + Γ(d, K0, R, bR),
where Γ depends only on the curvature bounds and radii (via Lemma A.3). In
particular, for small R, bR and bounded curvature, Γ = O(R2 + bR2).
Sketch. Cover supp(µ) by geodesic balls of radius r ≪1 and compare the mass
reallocation under F using Lemma A.3 plus the Jacobian sandwich; pass to the
limit as r ↓0.
Interpretation.
Even without sharp bi-Lipschitz constants, two-sided Ricci
bounds constrain global volume distortion and thus the worst-case entropy pro-
duction, scaling with curvature and the geometric diameter of the support.
A.3
A Bakry-Émery (LSI/T2) bound via extrapolated cur-
vature
Let πg ∝e−V volg be a log-concave reference on X with Bakry-Émery curvature
Ricg + ∇2V ≥κI (κ > 0). Define πh ∝e−bV volh on Y with Rich + ∇2 bV ≥bκI.
Assume µ ≪πg and consider ν = F#µ against πh.
Lemma A.5 (Stability of LSI under pullback). If F is C2 and satisfies As-
sumption A.1, then the pullback measure eπ := F πh on X has Bakry-Émery
curvature bounded below by
κF := κ ∧

bκ −∥KF ∥op

,
(up to O(∥∇dF∥) terms), where KF = RicF h−Ricg.
Sketch. Use the Bochner formula for the generator associated with F bV : Ricg +
∇2(F
bV )=Ric
F h+∇2(F b
V )−KF . Lower bounds combine by min and subtract the op-
erator norm of KF . Control higher-order terms by C2 bounds and reach.
Proposition A.6 (Entropy-transport bound with extrapolated curvature). Let
W2 be the 2-Wasserstein distance on Y under h. If κF > 0 (Lemma A.5) then
D(ν∥πh) ≤
1
2 κF
I(ν∥πh)
and
W 2
2 (ν, πh) ≤
2
κF
D(ν∥πh),
and consequently, for ν = F#µ,
D(F#µ∥πh) ≤
1
2 κF
I(F#µ∥πh)
≤
L
2 κF
I(µ∥πg),
where the last step uses ∥dF∥2 ≤L to transport Fisher information.
Sketch. Apply Log-Sobolev and Talagrand T2 inequalities with constant κF on
the pulled-back space, then push forward along F.
Information contraction
follows from the chain rule for Fisher information under Lipschitz maps.
28

Interpretation.
The curvature gap ∥KF ∥reduces the effective LSI/T2 con-
stant, loosening entropy and transport inequalities. Thus, larger extrapolated
curvature permits more entropy production for a fixed input information budget—
a quantitative expression of "curvature drives entropy."
A.4
Putting the bounds together
For applications, define the entropy production of a connector on (X, g, µ) as
σ[F | µ] := h(F#µ) −h(µ)
or
σrel[F | µ, πh] := D(F#µ∥πh) −D(µ∥πg).
Then, under the standing assumptions,
−d
2 log L ≤σ[F | µ] ≤
d
2 log L + Γ(d, K0, R, bR),
(1)
and, if κF > 0,
D(F#µ∥πh) ≤
L
2 κF
I(µ∥πg),
W 2
2 (F#µ, πh) ≤
2
κF
D(F#µ∥πh).
(2)
Consequences for design.
Small L (near-isometry), small curvature gap
∥KF ∥, and small support diameter (hence small Γ) jointly minimize entropy
production.
These translate to practical regularizers: bi-Lipschitz/transport
penalties, curvature control (via F h vs. g), and locality-aware routing.
A.5
A normal graph bound under reach and second fun-
damental form
Under positive reach, F is locally the normal graph of a C2 section over an
embedded chart. Let II denote the second fundamental form of the graph of F
in X × Y .
Proposition A.7 (Small-curvature (graph) expansion). If ∥II∥∞≤ε on a
neighborhood of supp(µ), then
σ[F | µ] =
Z
X
log JF dµ =
Z
X

1
2tr(DF ) + O(ε2)

dµ,
and ∥KF ∥= O(ε).
Sketch. Use the Jacobi determinant expansion log det(I +A) = tr(A)+O(∥A∥2)
with A = g−1DF . Local graph coordinates control ∥A∥and ∥II∥. Curvature
variation is linear in II at first order.
Interpretation.
When the connector is a small normal deformation (bounded
second fundamental form), entropy production is first-order in the metric dis-
tortion (trace of DF ), while curvature (hence LSI constants) changes at most
linearly. This is a precise version of "low-curvature routing is low-entropy."
29

A.6
Summary
The three families of bounds control entropy production by (i) local Jacobian
distortion, (ii) global curvature through volume comparison, and (iii) Bakry-
Émery curvature via LSI/T2 stability, where extrapolated curvature KF directly
weakens functional inequalities. Each bound becomes sharp in a different regime
(near-isometry, compact support, log-concave reference), and together they yield
practical regularizers for connectors that minimize curvature-induced entropy.
B
Simulation Details
We outline a reference pipeline to (i) construct time-varying interbrain graphs
from hyperscanning windows, (ii) compute discrete curvature (Forman-Ricci;
optional Ollivier-Ricci for small graphs), (iii) estimate the entropy of curva-
ture distributions, and (iv) detect phase transitions. Pseudocode is followed by
minimal Python snippets.
B.1
Pseudocode
Sliding windowing and graph construction.
Inputs: XA ∈RnA×T , XB ∈RnB×T , ∆, S, IBS
for s ∈{0, S, 2S, . . . , T −∆} do
Window WA := XA[:, s:s+∆], WB := XB[:, s:s+∆]
Compute interbrain weights wij := IBS(WA[i, :], WB[j, :])
Threshold (e.g., global percentile τ) : wij ←wij · 1{wij ≥τ}
Build bipartite graph Gs with edges ((A, i), (B, j), wij)
(optional) Add intra-brain kNN edges of small weight to stabilize neighborhoods
end for
Forman-Ricci curvature (edge-wise).
For each edge e = (u, v) with weight
we and node weights zu, zv (e.g., strength):
F(e) = we
 
zu
we
+ zv
we
−
X
eu∼u, eu̸=e
zu
√we weu
−
X
ev∼v, ev̸=e
zv
√we wev
!
.
Entropy of curvature distribution.
Given edgewise curvatures {F(e)} in
window s, estimate differential entropy Hs = −
R
fs(x) log fs(x) dx via KDE or
histogram.
Change-point detection.
Apply a univariate detector (e.g., CUSUM or
Bayesian online change-point) to {Hs}s (and optionally to curvature quantiles)
to flag rupture/repair episodes.
30

B.2
Minimal Python Snippets (Jupyter)
Dependencies: numpy, networkx, scipy (optional), matplotlib.
Windowing and IBS (PLV or correlation).
import numpy as np
from scipy.signal import hilbert
def sliding_windows(T, win, step):
return [(s, s+win) for s in range(0, max(1, T-win+1), step)]
def plv(x, y):
ax, ay = hilbert(x - x.mean()), hilbert(y - y.mean())
dphi = np.angle(ax) - np.angle(ay)
return float(np.abs(np.mean(np.exp(1j*dphi))))
def ibs_metric(x, y, kind="plv"):
return plv(x, y) if kind.lower()=="plv" else float(np.corrcoef(x,y)[0,1])
Interbrain graph (bipartite + optional intra-brain kNN).
import networkx as nx
from scipy.spatial.distance import cdist
def knn_adj(coords, k=3):
D = cdist(coords, coords); np.fill_diagonal(D, np.inf)
idx = np.argsort(D, axis=1)[:, :k]
A = np.zeros((coords.shape[0], coords.shape[0]));
A[np.arange(coords.shape[0])[:,None], idx] = 1.0
return np.maximum(A, A.T)
def build_inter_graph(WA, WB, metric="plv", prune_pct=80, A_xy=None, B_xy=None, knn_k=3):
nA, nB = WA.shape[0], WB.shape[0]
W = np.zeros((nA, nB))
for i in range(nA):
for j in range(nB):
W[i,j] = ibs_metric(WA[i], WB[j], metric)
tau = np.percentile(W, prune_pct); W = np.where(W>=tau, W, 0.0)
G = nx.Graph()
for i in range(nA): G.add_node(("A",i), hemi="A")
for j in range(nB): G.add_node(("B",j), hemi="B")
for i in range(nA):
for j in range(nB):
if W[i,j] > 0: G.add_edge(("A",i), ("B",j), weight=float(W[i,j]))
31

# optional intra-brain scaffolds
if A_xy is not None:
A = knn_adj(A_xy, k=knn_k)
for u in range(nA):
for v in range(u+1, nA):
if A[u,v] > 0: G.add_edge(("A",u), ("A",v), weight=0.01)
if B_xy is not None:
B = knn_adj(B_xy, k=knn_k)
for u in range(nB):
for v in range(u+1, nB):
if B[u,v] > 0: G.add_edge(("B",u), ("B",v), weight=0.01)
return G
Forman-Ricci curvature (edge-wise).
def node_strength(G, n):
return sum(w for *_, w in G.edges(n, data="weight", default=1.0))
def forman_ricci(G, node_weight="strength"):
edges = list(G.edges())
frc = np.zeros(len(edges))
for k, (u,v) in enumerate(edges):
we = G[u][v].get("weight", 1.0)
zu = node_strength(G,u) if node_weight=="strength" else 1.0
zv = node_strength(G,v) if node_weight=="strength" else 1.0
sum_u = sum(zu/np.sqrt(we*G[x][y].get("weight",1.0))
for (x,y) in G.edges(u) if {x,y}!={u,v} and we>0)
sum_v = sum(zv/np.sqrt(we*G[x][y].get("weight",1.0))
for (x,y) in G.edges(v) if {x,y}!={u,v} and we>0)
frc[k] = we * (zu/we + zv/we - sum_u - sum_v)
return frc, edges
Differential entropy (histogram or simple KDE).
def diff_entropy(values, method="kde"):
v = np.asarray(values, float); v = v[np.isfinite(v)]
if v.size == 0: return np.nan
if method == "hist":
# Freedman-Diaconis bins
iqr = np.subtract(*np.percentile(v, [75,25]));
bw = 2*iqr*(v.size**(-1/3)) if iqr>0 else np.std(v)*(v.size**(-1/3))
bins = max(8, int(np.ceil((v.max()-v.min())/(bw+1e-12))))
hist, edges = np.histogram(v, bins=bins, density=True)
p = np.maximum(hist, 1e-12); H = -np.sum(p*np.log(p))*(edges[1]-edges[0])
return float(H)
# Gaussian KDE
32

std = np.std(v);
if std <= 1e-12: return 0.0
bw = 1.06*std*(v.size**(-1/5))
grid = np.linspace(v.min()-3*std, v.max()+3*std, 512)
dens = np.mean(
np.exp(-0.5*((grid[:,None]-v[None,:])/bw)**2),
axis=1
) / (bw*np.sqrt(2*np.pi))
dens = np.maximum(dens, 1e-12)
return float(-np.trapz(dens*np.log(dens), grid))
CUSUM change-point detector (mean-shift).
def cusum_cp(x, alpha=0.01):
x = np.asarray(x, float); mu = np.mean(x); s = 0.0; cps = []
thr = np.std(x) * max(2.0, -np.log(alpha + 1e-9))
for t, xt in enumerate(x):
s = max(0.0, s + (xt - mu))
if s > thr: cps.append(t); s = 0.0
return cps
Putting it together (demo).
# Synthetic dyad with regime shift
Fs, T_sec = 200.0, 30.0
T = int(Fs*T_sec); t = np.arange(T)/Fs
nA, nB = 16, 16
rng = np.random.default_rng(7)
XA = 0.5*rng.standard_normal((nA,T)); XB = 0.5*rng.standard_normal((nB,T))
f0 = 10.0; phiA = rng.uniform(0,2*np.pi,nA); phiB = rng.uniform(0,2*np.pi,nB)
for i in range(nA): XA[i] += 0.8*np.sin(2*np.pi*f0*t + phiA[i])
for j in range(nB): XB[j] += 0.8*np.sin(2*np.pi*f0*t + phiB[j])
tc = int(15.0*Fs)
for i in range(6):
for j in range(6):
shared = 0.7*np.sin(2*np.pi*f0*t[tc:] + rng.uniform(0,2*np.pi))
XA[i,tc:] += shared; XB[j,tc:] += shared
win = int(2.0*Fs); step = int(0.25*Fs)
Hs, corridors, times = [], [], []
for s,e in sliding_windows(T, win, step):
G = build_inter_graph(XA[:,s:e], XB[:,s:e], metric="plv", prune_pct=80)
frc, edges = forman_ricci(G)
Hs.append(diff_entropy(frc, method="kde"))
w = np.array([G[u][v]['weight'] for (u,v) in edges])
33

mask = (w >= np.percentile(w,80)) & (frc >= -0.05)
corridors.append(w[mask].sum()/(w.sum()+1e-12))
times.append((s+e)/(2*Fs))
Hs = np.array(Hs); corridors = np.array(corridors); times = np.array(times)
cps = cusum_cp(Hs, alpha=0.01)
One-figure plot (optional).
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8,4))
ax.plot(times, Hs, label="H(FRC)")
ax.plot(times, corridors, label="Corridor score")
for cp in cps: ax.axvline(times[cp], linestyle="--", alpha=0.5)
ax.set_xlabel("Time (s)"); ax.set_ylabel("Value")
ax.set_title("Curvature-entropy and corridor score over time"); ax.legend()
plt.show()
B.3
Notes and Extensions
• Modality-aware IBS: band-limited PLV for EEG; coherence/correlation
for fNIRS/fMRI.
• ORC (optional): for small graphs, approximate Ollivier-Ricci via Sinkhorn/EMD
on 1-hop neighborhoods.
• Entropy estimators: histogram (robust) vs. KDE (smooth) vs. kNN
(fast; omitted for brevity).
• Phase transitions: augment CUSUM with quantile jumps of curvature
(e.g., 95th percentile) to increase sensitivity.
• Reproducibility: fix RNG seed; log window params (∆, S), pruning
threshold, and IBS metric.
C
Hyperscanning Modality Comparison
The interpretation of curvature signatures in interbrain networks is constrained
by the spatiotemporal sampling properties of different hyperscanning modalities.
Hinrichs et al. [20] provide canonical ranges for edge-weight magnitudes across
electroencephalography (EEG), functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS),
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), paired with task vs. resting
conditions. These ranges frame expectations for the distribution of curvature
values and their entropy across modalities.
34

Table 2: Illustrative edge-weight ranges and implications for hyperscanning
modalities under task and resting conditions (adapted from Hinrichs et al. [20]).
Modality
Condition
Edge-weight
range
Timescale
Empirical
im-
plication
EEG
Task
PLV ≈0.2-0.6
tens-
hundreds
ms
Captures
rapid,
transient
be-
haviour
EEG
Resting
PLV ≈0.1-0.4
tens-
hundreds
ms
Spontaneous
background
ac-
tivity
fNIRS
Task
Corr. ≈0.1-0.3
∼0.1-1 s
Suited to slower,
block-like tasks
fNIRS
Resting
Corr. < 0.2
∼0.1-1 s
Long-term spon-
taneous
fluctua-
tions
fMRI
Task
Coh. ≈0.2-0.5
1-2 s
Captures
sus-
tained
blocks,
too slow for fast
events
fMRI
Resting
Coh. < 0.2
1-2 s
Long-term
resting-state
networks
Interpretation.
Because EEG yields higher temporal resolution, its curva-
ture distributions are expected to show sharper divergences in entropy during
fast rupture-repair episodes, whereas fNIRS and fMRI capture only slower topo-
logical reconfigurations. Consequently, the entropy of Forman-Ricci curvature
distributions should be interpreted in light of the modality's resolution: rapid
synchrony shifts manifest in EEG, gradual meso-scale reorganization in fNIRS,
and long-term resting-state topology in fMRI. This comparison highlights that
curvature-based hyperscanning must be modality-aware, with expectations for
edge-weight magnitudes and entropy divergences conditioned on measurement
scale.
D
Proof Sketches
We sketch two complementary arguments: (i) Lyapunov stability of negentropic
corridors—regions where a connector is near-isometric and curvature production
is small; (ii) entropy bounds obtained from rate-distortion theory for mappings
that incur nonzero distortion on task-relevant patches.
35

D.1
Lyapunov Stability for Negentropic Corridors
Let (X, g) be a semantic manifold and F : (X, g) →(Y, h) a C2 connector. Fix
a compact, task-relevant patch U ⊂X. We call U a negentropic corridor for F
if the following hold for some constants 0 < α ≤β < ∞and ε, η > 0:
α gx(v, v) ≤Fhx(v,v) ≤β gx(v,v)
and
∥KF (x)∥op≤η,
∥IIF (x)∥≤ε,
∀x∈U, v∈TxX,(3)
where KF = RicF h−Ricg is the extrapolated Ricci tensor and IIF the second
fundamental form of the graph of F in X × Y .
Proposition D.1 (Local Lyapunov function). Define V (x) := 1
2 dh
 F(x), M
2,
where M ⊂Y is a smooth embedded target submanifold encoding the task con-
straint (e.g., an answer manifold or policy surface). Suppose M is λ-geodesically
convex in (Y, h) on F(U): Hessh
  1
2dh(·, M)2
⪰λ I on F(U) for some λ > 0.
Consider the gradient flow on X with respect to the pullback potential V ◦F:
˙x = −∇g(V ◦F)(x).
If the corridor inequalities (3) hold with α > 0 and ∥KF ∥, ∥IIF ∥suﬀiciently
small, then for all x ∈U,
˙V (x) = ⟨∇hV (F(x)) , dFx ˙x⟩h ≤−α λ ∥∇hV (F(x))∥2
h ≤0.
Hence V is a strict Lyapunov function on U, and the set F −1(M) ∩U is locally
asymptotically stable.
Sketch. By the chain rule, ∇g(V ◦F) = dF ∇hV , and the flow gives ˙x =
−dF ∇hV .
The metric sandwich F h≃G with G ∈[α, β] (Assumption (3))
implies ∥dF ˙x∥2
h = ⟨dF ˙x, dF ˙x⟩h = ⟨˙x, ˙x⟩F h≥α ∥˙x∥2g.
Convexity of M yields
⟨∇hV, ∇hV ⟩h ≥λ V , so ˙V = −⟨∇hV, dF dF ∇hV ⟩h≤−α∥∇hV ∥2
h≤−αλ V .
Small
∥KF ∥, ∥IIF ∥ensure stability of these inequalities on U (no curvature-induced
loss of convexity).
Input-to-state robustness.
If F is time-varying, Ft, with ∥dFt−dF∥, ∥∂tFt∥
bounded by δ, the same argument yields ˙V ≤−αλV + c δ for some c > 0, i.e.
ISS with respect to connector drift; thus negentropic corridors are robustly at-
tractive.
Corollary D.2 (Restricted isometry ⇒corridor stability). If F satisfies a re-
stricted isometry on U, (1 −ϵ)∥v∥2
g ≤∥dFxv∥2
h ≤(1 + ϵ)∥v∥2
g with ϵ < 1, then
α = 1 −ϵ, β = 1 + ϵ in (3); hence V is a Lyapunov function and F −1(M) ∩U
is locally asymptotically stable.
D.2
Entropy Bounds from Rate-Distortion
Let (X, µ) be a source with random variable X ∼µ, and let Y = F(X) be the
connector output on (Y, h). Fix a nonnegative distortion d : Y ×Y →R≥0 and a
36

target (reconstruction) variable bY with conditional law q(by|y). The (Shannon)
rate-distortion function is
R(D) :=
inf
p(by|x) : E[d(Y,bY )]≤D
I(X; bY ).
We connect R(D) to curvature-induced metric distortion on patches.
Assumption D.1 (Patch-wise distortion budget). Let {Uk} be a cover of task-
relevant regions with µ(Uk) = wk and local isometry constants αk, βk (as in
(3)). Assume that on each Uk, any decoder achieves at best average distortion
Dk ≥D∗
k(αk, βk, ηk), where ηk encodes the local curvature/II bounds.
Proposition D.3 (Lower bound on information and entropy). Under Assump-
tion D.1,
I(X; bY ) ≥
X
k
wk Rk(Dk),
h(Y ) ≤h(X) + E[log JF (X)],
and if Rk(·) are strictly convex, the bound tightens to the Jensen envelope
I(X; bY ) ≥R(P
k wkDk).
Sketch. Decompose I(X; bY ) = P
k Pr[X ∈Uk] I(X; bY | X ∈Uk) and apply the
definition of Rk(Dk) on each patch. The entropy identity follows from change of
variables; cf. Prop. A.2. The two statements combine to relate the log-Jacobian
budget to the required mutual information for a given per-patch distortion.
Geometric R(D) estimates.
On a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold, quadratic
distortion d(y, by) = ∥y−by∥2
h yields (in high-resolution regime) R(D) ≳d
2 log
 σ2
Y /D

,
with σ2
Y the per-dimension variance of Y . If F contracts variance on a cor-
ridor (β ≈1) but expands elsewhere, the mixture lower bound I(X; bY ) ≥
P
k wk d
2 log(σ2
Y,k/Dk) forces larger information for patches with poor corridor
geometry (large Dk).
Corollary D.4 (Connector entropy production vs. R(D)). Let σ[F | µ] =
h(Y )−h(X) be the entropy production. Then for any decoder achieving average
distortion D = P
k wkDk,
σ[F | µ] ≥−
X
k
wk log J−
F,k −C
=⇒
I(X; bY ) ≥R(D) ≳d
2 logσ2
Y
D ,
where J−
F,k is the geometric mean of the reciprocal Jacobian over Uk, and C
collects curvature-dependent constants (via Prop. A.7).
Hence larger curva-
ture/metric distortion (smaller corridors) increases the required rate for a target
distortion budget.
Sheaf-consistent gluing penalty.
If local decoders bYk violate overlap con-
sistency on Ui ∩Uj, a sheaf penalty ∥bYi −bYj∥2 induces an effective distortion
eD ≥D + λ P
i<j E[∥bYi −bYj∥2 1Ui∩Uj], pushing R( eD) upward.
Thus, sheaf-
consistent reconstruction lowers the information requirement at fixed accuracy.
37

D.3
Takeaways
Negentropic corridors—near-isometric regions with small extrapolated curvature
and bounded second fundamental form—admit a Lyapunov function that cer-
tifies local asymptotic stability of task manifolds under gradient-like flows, and
this stability is robust to mild connector drift. Conversely, where corridors are
absent (large Jacobian/curvature distortion), rate-distortion lower bounds force
higher mutual information to attain a given accuracy, and change-of-variables
implies larger entropy production. Together these sketches justify the design
heuristics: curvature control, bi-Lipschitz regularization, and sheaf-consistent
patching minimize entropy and stabilize inference.
38

References
[1] Lena Adel, Lisane Moses, Elisabeth Irvine, Kyle T Greenway, Guillaume
Dumas, and Michael Lifshitz.
A systematic review of hyperscanning in
clinical encounters.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 176:106248,
2025.
[2] Andrea Avena-Koenigsberger, Xiaoran Yan, Artemy Kolchinsky, Martijn P.
van den Heuvel, Patric Hagmann, and Olaf Sporns. A spectrum of routing
strategies for brain networks. PLOS Computational Biology, 15(3), 2019.
[3] Dimitris Bolis et al. Dialectical misattunement hypothesis. Unknown, 2017.
[4] Garrett Brown et al. Union of manifolds: Learning class-conditional struc-
tures for improved generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00001, 2023.
[5] Ariel Caticha. Geometry from information geometry. In Bayesian Inference
and Maximum Entropy Methods in Science and Engineering, 2015.
[6] Lawrence Cayton.
Algorithms for manifold learning.
Technical report,
University of California at San Diego, 2005.
[7] Tanima Chatterjee, Réka Albert, Stuti Thapliyal, Nazanin Azarhooshang,
and Bhaskar DasGupta. Detecting network anomalies using forman-ricci
curvature and a case study for human brain networks. Scientific Reports,
11(1):8121, 2021.
[8] François Chollet. Deep Learning with Python. Manning, 2nd edition, 2021.
[9] Lionel Da Costa, Noor Sajid, Thomas Parr, and Karl J. Friston. Active
inference on discrete state-spaces: A synthesis. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 99:102447, 2020.
[10] Charles Fefferman, Sanjoy Mitter, and Hariharan Narayanan.
Testing
the manifold hypothesis. Journal of the American Mathematical Society,
29(4):983-1049, 2016.
[11] Lukas Fesser and Melanie Weber.
Mitigating over-smoothing and over-
squashing using augmentations of forman-ricci curvature. In Learning on
Graphs Conference, 2023.
[12] Andy P. Field and Graham C.L. Davey. The developmental pathogenesis
of childhood fears: A review and framework. Behavioural and Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 29(3):259-276, 2001.
[13] Robin Forman. Bochner's method for cell complexes and combinatorial
ricci curvature. Discrete and Computational Geometry, 29:323-374, 2003.
[14] Karl J Friston, Thomas Parr, and Bert de Vries.
The graphical brain:
Belief propagation and active inference. Network Neuroscience, 1(4):381-
414, 2017.
39

[15] Alexander N. Gorban and Ivan Y. Tyukin. The blessing of dimensionality:
High-dimensional spaces enable reliable machine learning. Mathematical
Intelligencer, 40(3):5-7, 2018.
[16] Eleonora Gullone.
The developmental psychopathology of normal fear.
Behaviour Change, 17(2):86-97, 2000.
[17] Eleonora Gullone. The development of normal fear: A case for a develop-
mental taxonomy. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2003.
[18] U. Hakim, S. De Felice, P. Pinti, X. Zhang, J. A. Noah, Y. Ono, P. W.
Burgess, A. Hamilton, J. Hirsch, and I. Tachtsidis. Quantification of inter-
brain coupling: A review of current methods used in haemodynamic and
electrophysiological hyperscanning studies. NeuroImage, 280:120354, 2023.
[19] Antonia F. de C. Hamilton. Hyperscanning: Beyond the hype. Neuron,
109(3):404-407, 2021.
[20] Nicolás Hinrichs, Noah Guzmán, and Melanie Weber. On a geometry of
interbrain networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.10650, 2025.
[21] Nicolás Hinrichs,
Mahault Albarracin,
Dimitris Bolis,
Yuyue Jiang,
Leonardo Christov-Moore, and Leonhard Schilbach. Geometric hyperscan-
ning of affect under active inference.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08599,
2025.
[22] Neville J. King, Eleonora Gullone, and Thomas H. Ollendick. Pathways
to childhood phobias: A review and synthesis. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 36(1):141-173, 1998.
[23] Michael Kirchhoff, Thomas Parr, Emilio Palacios, Karl Friston, and Julian
Kiverstein. Markov blankets and free energy. Journal of The Royal Society
Interface, 15(138), 2018.
[24] Suman Kulkarni and Dani S. Bassett. Towards principles of brain network
organization and function. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02640, 2024.
[25] Nathan Lee et al.
Geometric deep learning:
Grids, groups, graphs,
geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00001, 2023.
[26] P. Read Montague, Gregory S. Berns, Jonathan D. Cohen, et al. Hyper-
scanning: Simultaneous fmri during linked social interactions. NeuroImage,
16(4):1159-1164, 2002.
[27] Peter Muris and Andy P. Field. The ontogeny of childhood fears: A review.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40(3):261-287, 2002.
[28] Peter Muris and Harald Merckelbach.
The development of normal and
abnormal fear and anxiety in children. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
and Clinics of North America, 9(2):309-329, 2000.
40

[29] Chris Olah.
Deep learning, nlp, and representations.
https://colah.
github.io/posts/2014-07-NLP-RNNs-Representations/, 2014.
Blog
post.
[30] Yann Ollivier. Ricci curvature of markov chains on metric spaces. Journal
of Functional Analysis, 256(3):810-864, 2009.
[31] Areejit Samal, R. P. Sreejith, Jiao Gu, Shiping Liu, Emil Saucan, and
Jürgen Jost. Comparative analysis of two discretizations of ricci curvature
for complex networks. Scientific Reports, 8(1):8650, 2018.
[32] Ellen Beate Hansen Sandseter and Leif Edward Ottesen Kennair. Chil-
dren's risky play from an evolutionary perspective: The anti-phobic effects
of thrilling experiences. Evolutionary Psychology, 9(2):257-284, 2011.
[33] Olaf Sporns. Networks of the Brain. MIT Press, 2010.
[34] A. Steyn-Ross and Moira Steyn-Ross. Modeling Phase Transitions in the
Brain. Springer, 2010.
[35] Jake Topping, Francesco Di Giovanni, Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Xi-
aowen Dong, and Michael M. Bronstein.
Understanding over-squashing
and bottlenecks on graphs via curvature. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
[36] Melanie Weber. Geometric machine learning. AI Magazine, 46(1):e12210,
2025.
[37] Melanie Weber,
Johannes Stelzer,
Emil Saucan,
Alexander Naitsat,
Gabriele Lohmann, and Jürgen Jost. Curvature-based methods for brain
network analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00180, 2019.
[38] Mohamed Ridha Znaidi, Jayson Sia, Scott Ronquist, Indika Rajapakse,
Edmond Jonckheere, and Paul Bogdan.
A unified approach of detect-
ing phase transition in time-varying complex networks. Scientific Reports,
13(1):17948, 2023.
41

