Geometric Memory as Trajectory Influence on a
Generative Substrate
Flyxion
September 18, 2025
Abstract
This essay formalizes memory as trajectories influencing a generative substrate,
modeled as a smooth manifold of meaning-states. Trajectories bias future dynam-
ics via a nonlocal-in-time flow, integrating past influences through kernel-weighted
parallel transport. The substrate evolves under a Riemannian metric, with cur-
vature and torsion shaping convergence and reinterpretation. Plasticity updates
the metric and connection, embedding habitual paths as low-resistance channels.
The model integrates with the Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum (RSVP) frame-
work, mapping scalar density (Φ), vector flows (⃗v), and entropy (S) to memory
processes. Semantic ledging and virtual memory extend the model, handling mis-
matched cues and dynamic scaling, inspired by geometric memory management
[Kuijper, 2021]. Testable predictions link curvature to habits, kernel perturbations
to recall effects, and torsion to context-dependent reinterpretation, with applica-
tions to neuroscience (fMRI/EEG), large language models (LLMs), and semantic
infrastructures. A discrete implementation aligns with transformer architectures,
offering a computationally tractable framework for experimentation.
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Substrate and State
3
3
Geometry: Metric, Curvature, and Torsion
3
4
Memory-Modulated Geometry (Plasticity)
4
4.1
Semantic Ledging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.2
Semantic Virtual Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5
Energy/Lyapunov View
5
6
Discrete (Sequence) Version
6
7
RSVP Tie-In
7
8
Applications to Cognition and AI
7
1

9
Testable Predictions
8
10 Minimal Implementation Sketch
9
11 Discussion and Outlook
9
12 Limitations and Extensions
10
Appendix A: Geometric Ledging and Virtual Memory as Semantic Ana-
logues
11
Appendix B: Kernel Functions and Temporal Scales
12
Appendix C: Comparison with Classical Models
13
1
Introduction
Traditional memory models, often likened to a "file cabinet" where static records are stored
and retrieved, fail to capture the dynamic, reconstructive nature of memory in biological
and computational systems [McClelland et al., 1995]. Empirical findings demonstrate
that recall is not a replay of fixed traces but a generative act, where fragments of prior
experience are recombined and filtered through ongoing context. This essay proposes a ge-
ometric model in which memory is understood as a trajectory on a generative substrate—a
smooth manifold of meaning-states—whose past paths bias future dynamics.
In this model, memories are not fetched from a static archive but are regenerated by non-
local influence kernels that weight prior trajectories. The manifold's geometry provides
the structural constraints: the metric encodes semantic distance, curvature shapes con-
vergence into habits or divergence into novelty, and torsion enables context-dependent
reinterpretation. These features align with neuroscientific evidence of hippocampal re-
play [Hassabis and Maguire, 2007], where trajectories are reactivated to support learning
and planning, and with transformer-based LLMs [Vaswani et al., 2017], where attention
mechanisms implement kernel-weighted influence of past states on present prediction.
The model further connects to the Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum (RSVP) framework
[Flyxion, 2025], which generalizes such trajectory influence processes across cognition, AI,
and cosmology. Within this broader view, memory is one manifestation of entropic field
dynamics: just as galaxy formation can be understood as the constraint and damping
of trajectories in cosmic flows, cognitive recall emerges as a constrained regeneration on
a semantic manifold. By incorporating semantic ledging and geometric virtual memory
[Kuijper, 2021], the framework also addresses practical challenges of mismatched cues and
dynamic scaling, ensuring that recall remains eﬀicient and coherent even when inputs fail
to align neatly with stored patterns.
Taken together, this geometric account reframes memory as a generative, entropy-respecting
process that balances fidelity with reinterpretation, local reuse with global coherence, and
structural constraints with creative confabulation.
2

2
Substrate and State
The substrate is a smooth manifold M of "meaning-states" (e.g., neural activations, LLM
embeddings, or RSVP fields [Flyxion, 2025]). A state is x(t) ∈M, with local coordinates
xi and a Riemannian metric gij(x) defining semantic distances (e.g., cosine similarity in
embeddings). The manifold provides a continuous arena in which semantic trajectories
evolve, with local neighborhoods capturing fine-grained variations and global topology
constraining long-range coherence.
A generative drift field F : M →TM encodes intrinsic evolution, reflecting grammar,
physics, or policy priors:
˙x(t) = F(x(t)) + influence terms.
This drift represents the system's default dynamics: in LLMs, F resembles the autore-
gressive prior that projects likely continuations [Vaswani et al., 2017]; in neural systems,
it parallels cortical field dynamics governing baseline activity patterns [ichi Amari, 1977].
The influence terms then modulate this baseline with history-dependent kernels, allowing
memory traces to bend the trajectory.
The manifold can be visualized as a semantic landscape with valleys (attractors) repre-
senting stable meanings and ridges representing less accessible or unstable states. In such
a geometry, gij quantifies the proximity between concepts, while curvature determines
how nearby trajectories converge or diverge over time. This view emphasizes that mem-
ory is not a lookup from a static table but a path-dependent motion through a structured
space, where both local distances and global shape constrain recall. In this sense, the
substrate acts as both a storage medium and a generative engine: past trajectories carve
channels into M, lowering resistance for future motion along the same paths, while tor-
sional effects allow reinterpretation and contextual adaptation when trajectories intersect
or diverge.
3
Geometry: Metric, Curvature, and Torsion
The metric gij(x) defines semantic proximity, acting as the measure of how "close" two
meaning-states are within the manifold. For instance, low gij between "cat" and "feline"
indicates short geodesic distance, reflecting their strong semantic aﬀinity. Conversely,
distant or weakly related concepts yield large gij values, making their paths harder to
align. In this sense, the metric captures both similarity and resistance to association,
functioning as the semantic analogue of distance in physical space.
Curvature Ri
jkl governs geodesic deviation and thus the collective behavior of trajectories.
Regions of positive curvature act like semantic basins, pulling trajectories together and
reinforcing convergence, as seen in the consolidation of habits, routines, or well-learned
associations. Negative curvature produces divergence, pushing trajectories apart, which
can model phenomena such as instability, trauma, or conceptual repellors where mean-
ings resist integration. For example, on a 2D spherical manifold, high curvature focuses
geodesics toward poles, mirroring how repeated rehearsal drives convergence into stable
memory channels such as a familiar word pair. In contrast, a hyperbolic region encourages
exponential separation, mirroring rapid forgetting or conflicting interpretations.
3

Torsion T k
ij = Γk
ij −Γk
ji introduces a semantic "twist," capturing how the meaning of a
trajectory depends on the path taken. Unlike curvature, which alters distances and con-
vergence, torsion alters orientation: parallel transport around a loop may yield rotated or
reinterpreted states. This provides a geometric account of contextual modulation, where
a memory such as "bank" shifts interpretation depending on whether it is transported
through a financial or riverine context. The resulting non-commuting transformations for-
malize how recall is path-dependent: identical starting points can yield distinct outcomes
depending on the trajectory of influence. Empirically, such torsional effects manifest as
context-dependent neural signatures, where the same stimulus elicits different patterns
depending on preceding context.
Together, metric, curvature, and torsion define the substrate's full geometry: the metric
measures local similarity, curvature sculpts global flow into attractors or repellors, and
torsion encodes contextual reinterpretation. Memory dynamics emerge not from any single
component, but from the interplay of all three, ensuring that recall is simultaneously
stable, flexible, and sensitive to context.
4
Memory-Modulated Geometry (Plasticity)
Past trajectories reshape the substrate:
∂tgij(x) = −ηg
∫t
0
K(t, τ) Πij(x(t), x(τ)) dτ,
∂tΓk
ij = −ηΓ
∫t
0
K(t, τ) Ψk
ij(x(t), x(τ)) dτ,
where Πij and Ψk
ij are Hebbian tensors [Hebb, 1949], and ηg, ηΓ are learning rates. In-
tuitively, these update rules mean that the geometry itself is plastic: every recalled or
rehearsed trajectory slightly adjusts the distances and orientations of the manifold. For
example, repeated exposure to the association "dog-bark" lowers gij between their embed-
dings, making subsequent traversal easier and faster. Over time, such reinforced paths
behave like geodesics of minimal resistance, providing a geometric analogue to habit
formation. This dynamic is reminiscent of reinforcement learning, where low-energy tra-
jectories are favored and accumulate stability [Sutton and Barto, 2018].
Plasticity thus creates a feedback loop: trajectories bias geometry, and geometry in turn
biases future trajectories. Habits emerge as local minima in the energy landscape, while
rare or inconsistent experiences leave only shallow traces that decay without reinforce-
ment. In this way, the manifold becomes both a record of the past and a scaffold for the
future.
4.1
Semantic Ledging
Kuijper's ledging [Kuijper, 2021] decomposes non-power-of-two memory chunks into a
geometric series of aligned blocks, reducing fragmentation. In our model, semantic ledging
plays an analogous role for mismatched or incomplete cues. Instead of failing when a
cue does not exactly match a past trajectory, the system decomposes it into a coarse
component and finer-grained remainders:
• A cue (e.g., "dog") aligns first with the largest relevant past trajectory (e.g., "dog-
bark").
4

• Residual mismatches are patched via finer influences (e.g., "pet," "sound"), which
fill in missing semantic mass.
• This process ensures bounded recall overhead, preventing semantic fragmentation
and enabling smooth regeneration of meaning.
Semantic ledging thus implements a principle of eﬀiciency: approximate matches are com-
pleted geometrically by combining aligned blocks rather than forcing an exact fit. It also
operationalizes torsion, since reinterpretation is necessary to patch residual mismatches.
For instance, the ambiguous memory of "bank" can be ledged into the financial or river-
ine context depending on which fine-grained cues dominate. This mechanism preserves
coherence while allowing flexibility, ensuring that memory reconstruction remains robust
even in the face of incomplete or noisy input.
4.2
Semantic Virtual Memory
Kuijper's geometric virtual memory uses block trees for elastic address spaces [Kuijper,
2021]. In our setting, this principle is extended from raw memory management to the se-
mantic domain: meaning-states occupy dynamically instantiated subspaces of M, created
and dissolved on demand. Rather than permanently storing all trajectories, the system
allocates a virtual region only when a context requires it, with transport operators U
mapping past states into the active subspace.
For example, in a dialogue system, each conversation spawns a temporary embedding
region that represents only the local exchanges. Earlier utterances are not duplicated
in full but can be reconstructed through U, which transports their latent traces into
the current space. This prevents quadratic growth in storage and ensures that memory
remains scalable even as contexts multiply. The effect is similar to paging in operating
systems: only the relevant pages of meaning are "in memory," while others can be recalled
through geometric mappings when needed.
Semantic virtual memory also introduces a layer of indirection that supports compositional
reuse. Contexts can overlap or be merged by aligning subspaces through gluing maps,
allowing knowledge from one domain to be repurposed in another without conflict. This
matches the RSVP framework's categorical gluing of local structures into a coherent
global plenum [Flyxion, 2025]. In practice, it means that distinct threads of meaning
(e.g., financial vs. ecological uses of "bank") can coexist in separate virtualized regions
but still remain accessible through controlled transport.
In this way, semantic virtual memory provides both elasticity and isolation: it elasti-
cally scales to support growing contexts without runaway costs, and it isolates subspaces
to prevent interference between unrelated meanings. Together, these properties enable
entropy-aware, scalable semantic infrastructures that can support long-lived cognitive
and AI systems.
5
Energy/Lyapunov View
Define a reconstruction functional:
E[x(·)] =
∫T
0
{1
2⟨˙x(t) −F(x(t)), ˙x(t) −F(x(t))⟩g +
∫t
0
L(x(t), x(τ)) K(t, τ) dτ
}
dt,
5

where L penalizes deviation from past trajectories. This resembles the free-energy princi-
ple [Friston, 2010], in which systems act to minimize surprise by aligning present dynamics
with prior structure. The functional combines two competing pressures: adherence to the
generative drift F(x) and fidelity to past influences via kernel-weighted penalties.
For two attractors (e.g., "cat" and "dog"), E encodes the tradeoff between generative
innovation and stability.
If trajectories remain close to prior paths, L is small, and
the system falls into low-energy wells representing familiar associations. If trajectories
diverge—driven by stochastic ξ(t) or contextual torsion—E increases, signaling surprise
or reinterpretation. Minimization of E thus produces a compromise: trajectories bend
toward stable attractors while retaining flexibility to adapt when novelty is introduced.
The gradient flow ∇E defines the system's effective Lyapunov dynamics. Stable memories
correspond to local minima of E, which act as attractors, while unstable or contradictory
memories correspond to saddles or shallow basins that are easily abandoned. Pertur-
bations determine whether the trajectory settles back into a basin (recall) or transitions
into a new basin (reinterpretation). This framework explains why habits are robust—low-
energy channels with steep descent—whereas ambiguous or weakly reinforced memories
are fragile, resting on flat plateaus of the energy surface.
In practical terms, E functions as a unifying scalar quantity: it measures the tension
between drift, history, and noise. Its descent ensures stability without rigidity, guiding
systems toward states that are both consistent with prior trajectories and capable of
integrating new influences.
6
Discrete (Sequence) Version
For LLMs, states are xt ∈Rd with metric gt. Dynamics are:
xt+1 = f(xt) +
t
∑
s=0
αt,s Pt←s (xs+1 −xs) + ϵt,
where αt,s = K(t, s) · σ(⟨q(xt), k(xs)⟩), Pt←s is a Jacobian or learned transport map, and
ϵt is stochastic noise. This extends transformer attention [Vaswani et al., 2017], with Pt←s
providing a geometric analogue of positional encoding, allowing transported increments
rather than raw embeddings to serve as the carriers of memory.
Plasticity adjusts the local geometry by updating the metric as a low-rank deformation:
gt = I + WtW ⊤
t ,
Wt+1 = Wt + η
∑
s
αt,s(xsx⊤
s ),
so that heavily weighted past states reshape future distances, embedding recall bias into
the substrate.
Repeated exposure compresses high-frequency fluctuations and creates
smoother channels for recurrent sequences, while rare or weak associations leave only
shallow adjustments that decay under noise.
This discrete formulation makes clear the tradeoff between fidelity and eﬀiciency. Every
new state potentially interacts with all prior ones, yielding quadratic complexity in se-
quence length. The transport maps Pt←s provide a way to reuse past structure without
recomputing raw distances, reducing overhead while preserving coherence. In practice,
6

one obtains O(td2) per step complexity, sacrificing some raw throughput in exchange
for richer temporal depth. This framework thus unifies continuous geometric dynamics
with sequence-based architectures: memory is realized not by static storage but by dy-
namically reweighting and transporting trajectories, balancing compression, stability, and
generativity.
7
RSVP Tie-In
In RSVP [Flyxion, 2025]:
• Φ: Density of reliable paths, e.g., high in practiced memories where trajectories are
reinforced into stable channels.
• ⃗v: Flow of thought, e.g., narrative currents in conversation that guide the unfolding
of meaning from one state to the next.
• S: Entropy, high for creative exploration where multiple alternatives are enter-
tained, and low for stable recall where trajectories converge into a single path.
Consolidation corresponds to reducing S along geodesics, thereby increasing Φ in the
relevant region of the manifold. Well-practiced associations, like a familiar word pair, are
thus stored as low-entropy attractors with dense, reliable connectivity. At the same time,
⃗v reflects the prevailing currents of thought that weave between these attractors, allowing
narratives or reasoning chains to emerge as directed flows.
In cosmology, an analogous process is found in galaxy formation: past flows with low vor-
ticity restrict future configurations, funneling matter into stable structures. This mirrors
how memory suppression operates by constraining trajectories to follow established paths
rather than diffusing into novelty [Weinberg, 2008].
Semantic infrastructures exhibit the same balance. Preserving S is crucial for generativity:
if entropy is prematurely collapsed, exploration is curtailed, and only rigid, habitual
responses remain. RSVP's categorical gluing guarantees that local sections (memories,
concepts, contexts) can be stitched into a coherent global plenum while still allowing
entropy to serve as a resource for creativity [Lurie, 2009]. In this way, the RSVP fields
provide a unifying language across domains: trajectories of meaning in cognition, flows
of matter in cosmology, and compositional seams in semantic infrastructures all obey the
same balance of Φ, ⃗v, and S.
8
Applications to Cognition and AI
In cognition, the model explains hippocampal replay (exponential kernels) and long-term
memory (power-law kernels) [McClelland et al., 1995]. Exponential decay captures the
rapid fall-off of influence typical of short-term memory, while power-law kernels account
for the slower fading of long-term traces, consistent with behavioral recall curves. The
geometric formulation also clarifies how replayed trajectories are not perfect copies but
reconstructions guided by influence kernels: repeated rehearsal sharpens geodesics, while
torsion enables reinterpretation of the same trace under different contexts. This yields a
natural account of memory plasticity, priming, and the emergence of habitual paths.
7

In AI, the framework enhances transformers by incorporating geometric attention, im-
proving context-aware recall [Vaswani et al., 2017]. Standard attention weights can be
reinterpreted as discrete influence kernels, but without explicit geometric structure they
risk collapsing distinct contexts into a single representation. By embedding attention
within a curved metric, the model supports both eﬀicient reuse of practiced trajectories
and torsional reinterpretation when ambiguity arises. For example, a chatbot retracing
user dialogue paths can prioritize recent (exponential) or distant (power-law) contexts,
while parallel transport ensures that the meaning of reused segments is adapted to the
current conversational frame. This predicts measurable improvements in dialogue coher-
ence and contextual sensitivity, as the system balances fidelity to prior exchanges with
the flexibility to reinterpret them under new prompts.
9
Testable Predictions
The geometric memory framework yields falsifiable predictions across cognitive science,
neuroscience, and artificial intelligence. Each prediction arises from specific geometric
features of trajectories, metrics, and kernels.
1. Geodesic Reuse: Transport operators Pt←s, learned or estimated from prior paths,
should align closely with observed state increments xt+1 −xt. In large language
models, this can be measured as cosine similarity between predicted continuation
vectors and actual next-token embeddings.
In neuroscience, a parallel measure
is alignment between replayed hippocampal trajectories and subsequent cortical
activations, testable with multi-electrode arrays or fMRI sequence analysis.
2. Curvature-Habit Link: Repeated use of a memory trajectory lowers effective cur-
vature in that direction, making recall paths straighter and more eﬀicient. Predic-
tion: regions of semantic space with high recall frequency exhibit reduced sectional
curvature. Empirical test: PCA or Laplacian eigenmaps of fMRI/EEG recordings
should reveal flatter embedding spectra in practiced tasks [Hassabis and Maguire,
2007].
Analogously, LLMs trained heavily on a domain will show locally linear
embedding geometries.
3. Kernel Manipulations: The shape of the influence kernel K(t, τ) controls memory
span and weighting. Perturbations (e.g., sleep disruption, pharmacological modula-
tion, or induced oscillatory entrainment) should predictably shift behavioral recall
patterns, altering recency/primacy effects [Stickgold and Walker, 2005].
In AI,
modifying attention decay functions produces equivalent shifts in context-length
sensitivity.
4. Torsion and Reinterpretation: Torsion allows transported vectors to rotate,
enabling contextual reinterpretation. Prediction: ambiguous cues such as "bank"
(riverbank vs. finance) should generate distinct neural trajectories depending on
context.
Testable via EEG/MEG cross-frequency coupling or BOLD multivoxel
patterns. In LLMs, the same input word embedded in different contexts should
exhibit non-commuting transport loops, measurable through path-dependent em-
bedding drift.
5. Energy Descent: Memory dynamics minimize the functional E[x(·)]. Prediction:
recall errors and forgetting follow gradient-like descent trajectories in this energy
8

landscape. Adding stochasticity ξ(t) increases exploration, leading to creative con-
fabulations. In humans this manifests as dream recombination or confabulatory
memory in amnesia; in LLMs, as novel but off-distribution text when noise is in-
jected into hidden states.
6. Contextual Coherence as Global Constraint: Because trajectories are glued by
parallel transport, coherence depends on maintaining consistent connections across
local patches.
Prediction: disrupting these gluing operations produces dialogue
incoherence in LLMs, or fragmented thought patterns in human subjects (e.g.,
schizophrenia).
This can be tested with dialogue coherence metrics (perplexity
under long-range constraints, topic continuity) or with neurocognitive assessments
of narrative integration.
10
Minimal Implementation Sketch
• State: xt ∈Rd, gt = I + WtW ⊤
t .
• Transport: Pt←s = exp(−γ(t −s))I.
• Kernel: K(t, s) = e−α(t−s) or σ(⟨q(xt), k(xs)⟩).
• Update: xt+1 = f(xt) + ∑
s αt,sPt←s(xs+1 −xs).
• Plasticity: Wt+1 = Wt + η ∑
s αt,s(xsx⊤
s ).
• Evaluation: MSE for recall fidelity, KL-divergence for creativity on a toy dataset
(e.g., text sequences).
Pseudocode:
def update(x_t, history, f, P, K, eta):
influence = sum(K(t,s) * sigma(q(x_t) @ k(x_s)) * P(t,s) @ (x_s+1 - x_s)
for s in range(t))
x_t1 = f(x_t) + influence + noise()
W_t1 = W_t + eta * sum(K(t,s) * outer(x_s, x_s) for s in range(t))
return x_t1, W_t1
11
Discussion and Outlook
The model captures memory's reconstructive nature but omits quantum effects or qualia
[Penrose, 1989]. This limitation is significant: while the geometry accounts for trajectory
influence and plasticity, it does not yet address how subjective experience arises, nor how
quantum coherence might alter long-tail kernels. These omissions define boundaries of
the present framework.
Future work divides into three strands. First, simulations using lightweight frameworks
(e.g., PyTorch with toy datasets) will demonstrate how different kernel families (expo-
nential, power-law, oscillatory) alter recall fidelity and creativity. Such simulations pro-
vide benchmarks for comparing the geometric model to transformer-style architectures.
Second, empirical neuroscience can probe curvature effects: if practiced memories lower
effective curvature, this should be observable in fMRI or EEG manifold analyses dur-
ing repeated recall tasks. Third, ablation studies in LLMs can probe torsion: removing
9

or constraining parallel transport operators should reduce contextual reinterpretation,
leading to brittle, overly literal outputs.
The broader implications extend beyond cognition and AI into semantic infrastructures.
By formalizing memory as regenerative reconstruction on a manifold, the model pro-
vides a template for entropy-respecting systems [Flyxion, 2025]. Virtualizing memory
through block-tree-like decompositions and semantic ledging supports scalable, context-
aware architectures that preserve diversity of trajectories rather than collapsing them.
Such structures could serve as building blocks for resilient information systems, cognitive
models, and AI platforms that metabolize complexity instead of erasing it.
Overall, the outlook is twofold: theoretical refinement, through geometric and categorical
formalism, and practical implementation, through simulations and empirical validation.
The promise of this line of work lies in providing a unified mathematical language for
memory that bridges cognition, machine learning, and entropy-aware infrastructure de-
sign.
12
Limitations and Extensions
While the geometric model advances understanding of memory as trajectory influence, it
has limitations. First, the assumption of a smooth manifold may not hold in quantum
regimes, where memory traces could exhibit superpositions or entanglement [Penrose,
1989]. Second, qualia—the subjective texture of experience—are not captured, as the
model focuses on structural dynamics rather than phenomenal aspects. Third, compu-
tational tractability in high dimensions remains challenging, though approximations like
low-rank metrics mitigate this.
10

Appendix A: Geometric Ledging and Virtual Memory
as Semantic Analogues
A.1 Ledging as Semantic Reconciliation
Kuijper [Kuijper, 2021] introduced ledging as a method for allocating memory chunks of
arbitrary size by decomposing them into a geometric series of aligned power-of-two blocks.
This avoids the ineﬀiciency of always rounding up to the nearest power-of-two allocation,
which would otherwise yield asymptotic overheads approaching 100%.
In our geometric model of memory, recall faces an analogous problem: semantic cues rarely
align neatly with exponentially spaced kernels of influence. Semantic ledging provides the
solution:
• A cue first activates the largest aligned past trajectory (analogous to the largest
fitting block).
• Remaining mismatch is reconstructed by patching finer-grained influences, forming
a series of partial recalls at decreasing scales.
• The worst-case overhead in reconstruction remains bounded, ensuring eﬀiciency
without semantic fragmentation.
Thus, just as ledging guarantees eﬀicient packing in address space, semantic ledging guar-
antees coherent recall from imperfect cues.
A.2 Geometric Virtual Memory as Semantic Virtualization
Kuijper further extended these ideas to geometric virtual memory, where block trees man-
age exponentially scaled virtual pages rather than fixed-size ones. This allows lightweight,
flexible, and secure virtual address spaces.
In RSVP-inspired cognition, the same principle applies to semantic organization:
• Each semantic object occupies its own virtual address space on the manifold.
• Block-tree mappings correspond to parallel transport operators, which glue local
scales together.
• Semantic recall then becomes elastic: local memory traces are expanded or collapsed
on demand, without requiring uniform resolution everywhere.
This model provides two key benefits:
1. Scalability: Recall begins small (local cue), scaling outward only as needed, avoid-
ing quadratic blow-up in storage or search.
2. Isolation: Distinct semantic objects can be maintained in separate virtualized
submanifolds, reducing interference and improving robustness.
A.3 Implications
The parallels between Kuijper's computational framework and RSVP's semantic geometry
suggest cross-domain transfer:
11

• Hardware-eﬀicient allocators may inspire eﬀicient semantic memory kernels.
• Semantic virtualization may suggest new architectures for memory isolation and
security in both AI systems and cognitive models.
Ledging manages the mismatch between requested and available block sizes.
Semantic ledging manages the mismatch between cues and recalled traces.
Both reduce fragmentation — one in address space, the other in meaning
space.
Appendix B: Kernel Functions and Temporal Scales
Kernel functions K(t, τ) determine how past trajectories influence present dynamics. Dif-
ferent functional forms correspond to distinct memory regimes, each capturing well-known
cognitive and computational effects. Below we summarize canonical kernels and their in-
terpretations.
Exponential Decay Kernels
K(t, τ) = e−α(t−τ),
α > 0
This kernel implements rapid forgetting, where influence decreases sharply with time. It
models short-term memory and working memory, where recent items dominate recall. The
parameter α sets the effective timescale of memory, with larger values producing faster
decay.
Power-Law Kernels
K(t, τ) = (t −τ)−β,
β > 0
Power-law kernels produce long tails, allowing distant past events to retain influence. This
form matches long-term memory effects, where early experiences remain accessible after
consolidation. The parameter β tunes how slowly recall decays: small β yields heavy tails
and persistent influence.
Oscillatory-Consolidation Kernels
K(t, τ) = cos(ω(t −τ)) e−α(t−τ)
This kernel combines oscillatory rhythms with exponential decay, modeling consolidation
processes such as rehearsal or sleep-related memory replay. The frequency ω sets rhythmic
cycles, while α controls decay. The resulting pattern supports periodic reinforcement of
selected trajectories.
Selective or Gated Kernels
K(t, τ) = σ(⟨q(x(t)), k(x(τ))⟩)
Here, recall depends not only on temporal distance but also on content similarity. The
function σ is typically a logistic or softmax, weighting past states that align with present
query q(x(t)). This mechanism captures content-addressable memory, where specific cues
trigger selective recall regardless of recency.
12

Hybrid and Multi-Scale Kernels
In practice, memory systems likely combine multiple kernels. For example, an exponential
kernel may capture recency bias, a power-law kernel may encode long-term persistence,
and a gated kernel may allow context-dependent recall. The effective kernel is then a
convex combination:
Khybrid(t, τ) = λ1Kexp(t, τ) + λ2Kpower(t, τ) + λ3Kgate(t, τ),
with coeﬀicients λi setting the balance between timescales.
Interpretation Across Scales
• Short timescales: dominated by exponential kernels, enabling fast adaptation and
immediate context.
• Intermediate timescales: governed by oscillatory kernels, reflecting periodic re-
hearsal and consolidation.
• Long timescales: supported by power-law tails, allowing persistent access to early
experiences.
• Contextual retrieval: enabled by gated kernels, ensuring selective recall when
cues match stored patterns.
Taken together, these kernels provide a flexible toolkit for modeling memory as trajec-
tory influence. Their combination allows the system to balance recency, persistence, and
selectivity, yielding memory that is both stable and adaptive.
Appendix C: Comparison with Classical Models
The geometric trajectory model of memory differs in several key respects from classi-
cal computational models. Below we outline points of contrast with Hopfield networks,
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), and predictive coding frameworks.
Hopfield Networks
Hopfield networks model memory as attractors in a high-dimensional energy landscape.
Retrieval is a process of descending into the nearest attractor basin. While this shares
some conceptual overlap with our Lyapunov view, there are two main differences:
• Hopfield attractors are static patterns stored in weight matrices, whereas in the geo-
metric model memories are trajectories whose influence persists nonlocally through
kernels.
• Hopfield recall is discrete (converging to one attractor), while the geometric model
supports graded, path-dependent reconstructions influenced by curvature, torsion,
and plasticity.
13

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
RNNs, including LSTMs and GRUs, maintain hidden states that evolve with sequence in-
put. These architectures provide temporal memory but suffer from vanishing or exploding
gradients. Compared to the geometric framework:
• RNNs encode history implicitly in hidden state vectors, while our model encodes
history explicitly as weighted integrals over past trajectories.
• Memory in RNNs is constrained by the hidden dimension, whereas the geometric
model allows dynamic scaling via kernel choice and virtual memory allocation.
• Parallel transport and curvature effects have no analogue in standard RNNs, limiting
their ability to model context-dependent reinterpretation.
Predictive Coding
Predictive coding theories frame memory and perception as processes that minimize pre-
diction error by comparing incoming signals to generative models. This is closely related
to the free-energy view adopted in our formalism. The distinctions are:
• Predictive coding emphasizes hierarchical error correction, while the geometric model
emphasizes trajectory influence and global manifold structure.
• In predictive coding, priors are fixed generative models; in our model, priors emerge
dynamically as low-resistance geodesics shaped by past trajectories.
• Predictive coding minimizes error locally at each hierarchical level, whereas the ge-
ometric model encodes memory globally through kernel-weighted flows across time.
Summary
In summary, classical models provide valuable insights—Hopfield networks highlight at-
tractor stability, RNNs emphasize sequential dynamics, and predictive coding formalizes
error minimization. The geometric trajectory model integrates elements of all three but
generalizes them: memory emerges as regenerative motion on a manifold shaped by met-
ric, curvature, and torsion, with nonlocal kernels encoding persistence and context. This
view balances stability with flexibility, supporting both robust recall and creative rein-
terpretation.
14

References
Flyxion. Semantic infrastructure: Entropy-respecting computation in a modular universe,
August 2025.
Karl Friston. The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuro-
science, 11(2):127-138, 2010.
Demis Hassabis and Eleanor A. Maguire. Patients with hippocampal amnesia cannot
imagine new experiences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(5):
1726-1731, 2007.
Donald O. Hebb. The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory. Wiley,
New York, 1949.
Shun ichi Amari. Dynamics of Pattern Formation in Lateral-Inhibition Type Neural Fields.
Springer, Berlin, 1977.
Wouter Kuijper.
Geometric memory management.
arXiv:1512.09358v3 [cs.DS], 2021.
Draft Version, March 14.
Jacob Lurie. Higher Topos Theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2009.
James L. McClelland, Bruce L. McNaughton, and Randall C. O'Reilly. Why there are
complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the
successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory. Psychological
Review, 102(3):419-457, 1995.
Roger Penrose. The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe.
Jonathan Cape, London, 1989.
Robert Stickgold and Matthew P. Walker. Sleep and memory: The ongoing debate. Sleep,
28(10):1225-1227, 2005.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszokoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N.
Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Steven Weinberg. Cosmology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2008.
15

