Interpolative Reasoning: Entropy,
Homotopy, and the Continuum of Thought
Flyxion
Contact: @galactromeda
October 2025
Abstract
Reasoning, cognition, and coherence form a continuous manifold between con-
straint and expansion. Building on [Wu et al.(2025)]—who show that linear inter-
polation between "Instruct" and "Thinking" models yields a lawful three-stage
evolution of reasoning—this essay situates that empirical law within the Relativistic
Scalar-Vector Plenum (RSVP) theory of entropic cognition and the Semantic Infras-
tructure framework for categorical merging. By extending these frameworks through
conceptual blending, syntactitude, and the amoral grammar of cognition, the essay
advances a uniﬁed thesis: reasoning is a continuous interpolation between compres-
sion and expansion in semantic ﬁeld space, and grammar—though amoral—is the
mechanical substrate through which meaning incarnates.
1
Introduction: From Discrete Models to Continu-
ous Minds
'To reason is to interpolate between
silence and speech.'
Anonymous
1

[Wu et al.(2025)] show that when parameters of a model optimised for short-form
"instruction" responses are linearly merged with those of a model trained for extended
chain-of-thought reasoning, reasoning intensity increases smoothly with the interpolation
coeﬃcient λ. This reveals that rational behaviour emerges along a continuum rather than
as a categorical capability, providing an empirical bridge to the entropic and categorical
theories of cognition developed in RSVP and Semantic Infrastructure [Curry et al.(2018)].
Scope and Claims
Aim. To formalise reasoning as continuous entropic interpolation across semantic
modules and to unify empirical ([Wu et al.(2025)]) and theoretical (RSVP, SI)
perspectives.
Core Claims.
(a) Reasoning continuity is measurable as a smooth λ-trajectory linking entropy
and coherence.
(b) The λ-sweet-spot obeys a convex-concave optimality law in coherence/entropy
space.
(c) Entropy-respecting merges correspond to categorical colimits and sheaf gluing.
(d) Failures of coherence correspond to non-vanishing cohomology classes.
(e) Grammar's amorality is a necessary condition for ethical compression.
2
The Historical Lineage of Merging
From "Model Soups" and Task Arithmetic to TIES-Merging, model merging has evolved
from heuristic averaging toward structural understanding. [Wu et al.(2025)] reduce this
lineage to its minimal form: direct parameter interpolation. What earlier techniques
treated as empirical guesswork becomes a lawful transformation in reasoning space.
2

3
The Experimental Law
'Every smooth curve hides a law of
thought.'
Ortega y Gasset
[Wu et al.(2025)] identify a reproducible three-stage evolution as λ varies from 0 to 1:
Stage 1: λ ∈[0, 0.4): Instruct-dominated responses—coherent but shallow.
Stage 2: λ ∈[0.4, 0.6]: Transitional phase—explicit reasoning crystallises.
Stage 3: λ ∈(0.6, 1.0]: Thinking-dominated regime—verbose and recursive with diminishing
returns.
These stages constitute an experimental law of reasoning continuity: thought emerges
as a gradient rather than a switch.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Laminar
(Compression)
Lamphrodynamic
(Critical Band)
Negentropic
(Expansion)
Sweet Spot
Interpolation Coeﬃcient λ
Normalized Entropy / Reasoning Cost
Figure 1: Empirical λ-entropy curve illustrating the three reasoning regimes observed by
[Wu et al.(2025)] and their correspondence to RSVP ﬁeld dynamics.
Metrics and Operationalization
Let E(λ) denote reasoning cost and C(λ) denote coherence. Deﬁne the Over-Thinking
Index (OTI):
OTI(λ) = C(λ + δ) −C(λ)
E(λ + δ) −E(λ).
3

A ﬂattening OTI curve indicates diminishing marginal information gain—the onset of
over-reasoning.
4
RSVP Theory: Entropic Field Interpretation
'Form seeks equilibrium with entropy.'
Anonymous
Within the Relativistic Scalar-Vector Plenum (RSVP) framework, rationality is ex-
pressed as entropic relaxation:
Φ′ = Φ + λ ∇ΦS(Φ, v),
where Φ is scalar potential, v is vector ﬂow, and S is entropy. Low λ corresponds to
compression (minimal entropy production), high λ to negentropic recursion. The "sweet
spot" near λ≈0.5 represents equilibrium between structural form and entropic exploration.
5
Semantic Infrastructure:
Modular Computation
and Entropic Cohesion
'To think is to glue what cannot yet
be glued.'
Anonymous
While RSVP provides the physical ontology of entropic dynamics, Semantic Infras-
tructure (SI) deﬁnes the informational architecture through which such dynamics can
be represented, merged, and reasoned over. It formalises meaning as an arrangement
of semantic modules—locally self-consistent systems of description that interact via
coherence-preserving morphisms. Each module Mi comprises an internal syntax (its gen-
erative grammar) and an external semantics (its referential interface). Between modules,
4

information ﬂows along morphisms that preserve entropy balance while permitting partial
overlap or conﬂict.
Formally, SI can be viewed as a ﬁbered symmetric monoidal category
π : S −→B,
where B indexes theoretical domains or "bases of discourse," and S contains semantic
ﬁbers π−1(b) representing local theories, models, or computational agents. Morphisms
within a ﬁber capture intra-domain transformations; morphisms across ﬁbers capture
translation or analogy between domains [Curry et al.(2018)].
A merge operation between modules,
µλ : M1 ⊗M2 →M3,
is interpreted as an entropy-respecting colimit—it combines representations while min-
imising semantic loss. The interpolation parameter λ regulates this merger's degree of
compression versus expansion, analogously to the RSVP parameter governing entropic ﬂow.
At λ≈0.5, maximal cross-module coherence occurs: the point where shared information
saturates mutual predictability without collapsing diversity.
Conceptually, Semantic Infrastructure generalises linguistic grammar, database schema,
and neural activation manifolds into a single abstract geometry of relation. It provides
the formal substrate upon which RSVP's physical entropic ﬂows instantiate symbolic and
sub-symbolic meaning. In this view, thought is neither discrete computation nor pure
thermodynamic gradient, but the maintenance of coherence among interacting semantic
modules under entropic constraints.
Deﬁnition 1 (Entropy-Respecting Merge) A merge µλ : M1 ⊗M2 →M3 is entropy-
respecting if there exists a functional E with E(M3) ≤λE(M1) + (1 −λ)E(M2) and µλ is
functorial with respect to coherence-preserving morphisms.
5

6
Semantic Infrastructure: Homotopy and Merge
Semantic Infrastructure models computational systems as objects in a ﬁbered symmetric
monoidal category of semantic modules. Merging two modules corresponds to a homotopy
colimit preserving coherence while minimising semantic tension:
hλ : Minstruct −→Mthinking,
hλ(0) = Minstruct, hλ(1) = Mthinking.
Intermediate models near λ ≈0.5 occupy a region of minimal semantic curvature—
maximum information throughput per entropy cost.
7
Conceptual Blending and Syntactitude
'Structure imitates sense.'
Douglas Hofstadter
The continuum of reasoning mirrors conceptual blending—the cognitive mechanism by
which disparate spaces fuse into an emergent meaning manifold. Hofstadter's notion of
syntactitude—ﬂuency by which structure imitates sense—captures the same phenomenon
at the formal level. At the critical λ range, the model's syntax begins to internalize
semantics.
[Leon(1990)] named our "fear of syntactitude," the worry that we are "syntactic engines
the functioning of which requires no reference to contentful states." [Wu et al.(2025)]'s
interpolated models enact this fear empirically. RSVP reframes syntactitude as a necessary
phase: syntax as the low-entropy scaﬀold through which meaning propagates. Here Φ
stores syntactic potential, v expresses semantic ﬂow, and S measures coherence.
8
The Amoral Nature of Grammar
'Grammar validates form, not virtue.'
Anonymous
6

Grammar is amoral—it validates form without regard to value.
This neutrality
underwrites both linguistic recursion and neural computation.
Model interpolation
makes it explicit: the same linear mechanism yields insight at one λ and over-thinking
at another. In RSVP, grammar corresponds to the entropy channel—directionless yet
essential.
In Semantic Infrastructure, morphisms preserve structure but not virtue.
Bounding indiﬀerence within coherence becomes the ethical task of intelligence.
9
Eﬃciency and the Ethics of Description
'Compression is an ethics of
attention.'
Anonymous
RSVP and Semantic Infrastructure both treat eﬃciency as an ethical dimension: to
compress without erasing meaning. [Wu et al.(2025)]'s λ-sweep visualizes this principle—
maximal inference per token near λ ≈0.5. Beyond it, over-thinking reﬂects entropic
ineﬃciency. Ethical description can thus be measured as coherence-to-entropy ratio.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Sweet Spot
Interpolation Coeﬃcient λ
Normalized Entropy / Reasoning Cost
Entropy / Cost
0
0.5
1
Reasoning Depth (inverse of entropy)
Reasoning Depth
Figure 2: Dual-axis view of the λ-entropy relation. Blue (left): reasoning cost / entropy.
Green (right): its inverse, reasoning depth.
The mid-band near λ ≈0.5 marks the
equilibrium between entropic expansion and cognitive compression—the "sweet spot" of
eﬃciency predicted by RSVP and Semantic Infrastructure.
7

10
Uniﬁed Entropic-Semantic Dynamics
The convergence of Model Interpolation, RSVP, and Semantic Infrastructure yields a
single principle:
Reasoning is a continuous interpolation between compression and
expansion in semantic ﬁeld space.
Table 1: Comparative structure of Model Interpolation, RSVP Theory, and Semantic
Infrastructure.
Framework
Mechanism
Observable Regim
Model Interpolation ([Wu et al.(2025)])
Linear parameter blend
Instruct →Transitio
RSVP Theory
Entropic descent in (Φ, v, S) ﬁelds
Laminar →Lamphr
Semantic Infrastructure
Homotopy merge of semantic modules
Compression →Ten
11
Category-Theoretic Interpretation
The interpolative continuum can be formalised categorically. Let E denote the category
of entropic states, whose objects are informational conﬁgurations (Φ, v, S) and whose
morphisms are coherence-preserving transformations. Within this view, RSVP deﬁnes a
functor
Rλ : EInstruct −→EThinking,
parameterised by λ, mapping low-entropy structural forms to high-entropy semantic
expansions. Reasoning corresponds to the computation of a colimit in E:
Reason = colimλ∈[0,1] Rλ,
the universal object integrating all local interpolations into a coherent trajectory. The
"sweet spot" at λ≈0.5 arises where the induced natural transformation between compression
and expansion functors becomes isomorphic—an equilibrium of coherence and diversity.
8

Semantic Infrastructure then interprets each cognitive layer as a ﬁbered category above the
base of entropic dynamics, with merging as a lax monoidal functor preserving information
invariants [Curry et al.(2018)].
Lemma 1 (Colimit Coherence) If each interpolation functor Rλ preserves coherence
morphisms and entropy is subadditive, the λ-sweep induces a colimit in E.
Proposition 1 (Sweet-Spot Optimality) Let C : [0, 1]→R≥0 be a continuous coher-
ence functional and E : [0, 1]→R>0 a continuous cost/entropy functional. Assume:
(i) C is concave and diﬀerentiable on (0, 1);
(ii) E is convex, strictly increasing, and diﬀerentiable on (0, 1).
For any ε > 0, deﬁne the eﬃciency objective
Uε(λ) =
C(λ)
E(λ) + ε.
Then:
(a) There exists λ⋆∈[0, 1] maximizing Uε.
(b) If the derivative ratio R(λ) := C′(λ)
E′(λ) is unimodal on (0, 1) (single-peaked), then the
maximizer λ⋆is unique.
(c) Any interior maximizer satisﬁes the ﬁrst-order KKT equation
C′(λ⋆)
 E(λ⋆) + ε

= C(λ⋆) E′(λ⋆).
[Proof sketch] Continuity on a compact domain ensures existence.
Concavity of
C and convexity/monotonicity of E imply Uε is quasiconcave in many practical cases;
uniqueness follows from unimodality of R(λ) via a standard fractional programming
argument (Dinkelbach transform). Diﬀerentiating Uε and setting the derivative to zero
yields the KKT condition.
9

Remark 1 (Interpretation) The KKT equation says the marginal coherence gain equals
the cost-weighted coherence level: C′/C = E′/(E + ε) at λ⋆. Operationally, λ⋆is where
the Over-Thinking Index OTI(λ) stops increasing.
Corollary 1 (Robustness under aﬃne rescalings) For any a > 0, b ∈R, replacing
C by aC and E by aE + b does not change the optimizer λ⋆.
12
Sheaf-Theoretic Interpretation
Sheaf theory oﬀers a geometric dual to the categorical formulation. Let X denote the
entropy manifold parameterised by λ. To each open region U ⊆X assign a sheaf F(U)
of local reasoning states—token sequences, embeddings, or semantic representations.
Global reasoning corresponds to taking the sheaf's space of sections Γ(X, F), gluing local
computations into a consistent whole. Failures of coherence—hallucination, contradic-
tion, or over-thinking—appear as nonvanishing higher cohomology groups H>0(X, F),
representing informational obstruction. The RSVP vector ﬁeld v acts as the diﬀerential
on these cochains, while entropy S deﬁnes the curvature governing patch alignment.
Semantic Infrastructure thus becomes the topos of such sheaves, within which reasoning
is the pursuit of globally continuous sections under entropy constraints. Where category
theory formalises composition, sheaf theory describes extension—the passage from many
consistent locals to one coherent global [Godement(1958)].
Sheaf cohomology, originating in algebraic topology [Godement(1958)], computes these
obstructions via derived functors or ech complexes, with vanishing theorems (e.g., Leray's
theorem) guaranteeing acyclicity under ﬁne covers. In our context, the ech cohomology
ˇH∗(U, F) measures gluing failures, where H1 detects pairwise inconsistencies and higher
groups capture multi-patch cycles—formalizing the entropy-curvature heuristic in Rem. 2.
Theorem 1 (Cohomological Coherence Theorem) Let X be the entropy manifold
parameterized by λ, and let F be a sheaf of local reasoning states on X (e.g., token traces,
embeddings, or modular summaries). Suppose U = {Ui}i∈I is a good cover of X such that:
(i) ( Local soundness) For each i, there exists a section si ∈F(Ui);
10

(ii) ( Pairwise agreement) si|Ui∩Uj = sj|Ui∩Uj for all i, j;
(iii) ( Acyclic overlaps) ˇH1(Ui0∩· · ·∩Uik, F) = 0 for all ﬁnite intersections in U.
Then there exists a unique global section s∈Γ(X, F) such that s|Ui = si for all i.
[Proof sketch] By standard ech-sheaf theory, the obstruction to gluing {si} lies in
ˇH1(U, F). The acyclicity of all ﬁnite overlaps forces ˇH1(U, F) = 0, whence the 1-cocycle
class vanishes and a global section exists. Uniqueness follows from sheaf separation
[Godement(1958)].
Corollary 2 (Failure modes as obstructions) If local sections are sound and pair-
wise consistent but no global section exists, then ˇH1(U, F) ̸= 0. Empirically, such non-
vanishing classes correspond to persistent hallucinations, contradictions, or context "tears"
that do not disappear under local ﬁxes.
Remark 2 (Entropy-curvature heuristic) If the RSVP vector ﬁeld v induces a dif-
ferential on cochains and entropy S controls local curvature, rises in "over-thinking" can
be modeled as curvature increases that make ˇH1 harder to annihilate. Reducing entropy or
improving overlap constraints (prompting, retrieval, or module alignment) tends to drive
ˇH1 →0 and restore global coherence.
Lemma 2 (Eﬃciency ⇒Gluing Window) Assume Uε in Prop. 1 is maximized at
λ⋆. If decoding bandwidth (context window) is allocated proportional to E(λ), then any
cover by windows centered on λ⋆with overlap at least the mutual information threshold
induces pairwise agreement, enabling gluing under the hypotheses of Thm. 1.
[Proof sketch] At λ⋆, marginal information gain per cost is maximal, so allocating
overlap proportional to cost ensures suﬃcient shared evidence for agreement. Acyclicity
then yields global sections.
Applications of Sheaf Cohomology in AI and Cognition
Sheaf cohomology, as formalized in Thm. 1 and Cor. 2, extends beyond pure mathe-
matics to interdisciplinary domains, particularly AI and cognitive modeling, where it
11

quantiﬁes obstructions in local-to-global data integration via derived functors on sheaf
complexes [Godement(1958)]. In machine learning, sheaf cohomology underpins sheaf
neural networks (SNNs), which generalize graph neural networks by assigning stalks
(data vectors) to topological spaces and restrictions to morphisms, enabling heteroge-
neous data fusion [Hansen and Ghrist(2023)]. For instance, in topological data analysis
(TDA), the ech cohomology computes persistence diagrams to detect features in point
clouds, revealing hidden structures in embedding spaces akin to the reasoning states in F
[Barannikov et al.(2022)].
In multi-agent systems and reinforcement learning, cohomology measures coordination
failures: non-vanishing H1 classes signal emergent inconsistencies among agents' local
policies, even if pairwise agreements hold—mirroring context tears in over-thinking regimes
(high λ) [Robinson(2017)]. This ties to the entropy-curvature heuristic, where rising S
increases cohomological dimension, obstructing global optimality as per Prop. 1.
Further applications include:
• Interpretability in Deep Learning: Cohomological transformers prune circuits
by detecting vanishing cycles in activation sheaves, reducing model complexity while
preserving coherence, with empirical gains in physics-informed neural networks
(PINNs) for ﬂuid dynamics simulations [Bodnar et al.(2023)].
• Multi-Modal Learning: In vision-language models, sheaf Laplacians harmonize
modalities; H2 obstructions diagnose alignment failures, extendable to RSVP's
entropic ﬁelds for adaptive fusion [Ebrahimi et al.(2021)].
• Cognitive Pathology Diagnostics: Non-trivial cohomology models hallucina-
tions as global obstructions from local token patches, proposing entropy-reducing
interventions (e.g., retrieval-augmented generation) to force acyclicity.
• Scaling Laws and Eﬃciency: In large models, cohomology bounds the "sweet
spot" window (Lem. 2), predicting when bandwidth allocation proportional to E(λ)
minimizes H1, aligning with Wu et al.'s transitional phase [Wu et al.(2025)].
12

These applications position sheaf cohomology as a diagnostic toolkit for entropy-
respecting systems, bridging RSVP's dynamics and Semantic Infrastructure's merges to
actionable AI designs [Curry et al.(2018)].
13
Threats to Validity
• Model-Family Dependence: present results rely on Qwen3 checkpoints; replication
across Llama, Gemma, Mistral remains open.
• Non-Linearity: sharp minima may break convex assumptions of the sweet-spot lemma.
• Metric Sensitivity: OTI varies with the coherence measure chosen.
• Categorical Assumptions: functors are treated as lax-monoidal; stricter coherence
laws might alter the colimit proof.
• Topological Choice: diﬀerent deﬁnitions of open sets in the λ-manifold yield distinct
obstruction classes.
14
Implications and Future Work
(a) Empirical RSVP Validation: The λ-phase curve quantiﬁes RSVP's predicted
entropic curvature. Fitting entropy metrics to reasoning depth could empirically
test the theory.
(b) Semantic Merge Operators: Extending interpolation to triadic or n-ary merges
would instantiate higher-order colimits and probe multi-module coherence.
(c) Adaptive Entropy Feedback: Letting λ evolve as λ = f( ˙S) may produce self-
regulating architectures that enact entropy-guided recursion.
(d) Cohomological Diagnostics: In sheaf-theoretic terms, systematic reasoning fail-
ures correspond to persistent cohomology classes.
Studying their vanishing or
13

persistence under ﬁne-tuned entropy budgets could yield a new diagnostic language
for AI interpretability and cognitive pathology alike [Hansen and Ghrist(2023)].
15
Conclusion: The Continuum of Thought
Between instruction and reﬂection lies a gradient—an entropic manifold on which cognition
interpolates between compression and expansion. [Wu et al.(2025)] demonstrate this
empirically; RSVP and Semantic Infrastructure explain it theoretically. Grammar, though
amoral, furnishes the syntax of possibility. Syntactitude is not a ﬂaw but the mechanical
precondition of sense. Reasoning, in its deepest physics, is the entropy of form seeking
coherence. Through category theory and sheaf theory, this insight becomes formally
expressible: the homotopy of meaning is the geometry of thought itself
Appendix A: Experimental Protocol
The experimental protocol follows the interpolation procedure outlined in [Wu et al.(2025)],
adapted for reproducibility in RSVP and Semantic Infrastructure contexts. Models are
merged via linear parameter interpolation:
θmerged = λθthinking + (1 −λ)θinstruct,
where θthinking and θinstruct are checkpoints from Qwen3-4B or similar families.
Pseudocode for the sweep:
import numpy as np
import torch
lambdas = np.linspace(0, 1, 11)
for lambda_val in lambdas:
theta_merged = lambda_val * theta_think + (1 - lambda_val) * theta_instr
results = evaluate(theta_merged, benchmarks=['AIME', 'IFEval', 'GPQA'],
14

metrics=['Pass@k', 'Mean@k', 'Token Count'])
log_results(lambda_val, results)
# Store coherence C and cost E
Benchmarks include math (AIME'25), instruction-following (IFEval), and science
(GPQA-Diamond). Decoding uses temperature 0.7, top-p 0.95. Entropy E is measured
as average tokens/latency; coherence C via Pass@64 and Mean@64. OTI is computed
post-hoc with δ = 0.1. Hardware: A100 GPUs, PyTorch 2.1. Replication seeds: 42 for all
runs.
Appendix B: Proof Sketches
[Proof of Proposition 1 (Detailed Sketch)] The existence (a) follows from the extreme
value theorem: Uε is continuous on the compact interval [0, 1], so a maximum λ⋆exists.
For uniqueness (b), assume R(λ) = C′(λ)/E′(λ) is unimodal. The critical points
of Uε satisfy the KKT equation derived from
d
dλUε = 0, which rearranges to R(λ) =
C(λ)/(E(λ) + ε). Since the right-hand side is decreasing (by convexity of E and concavity
of C), and a unimodal R crosses a decreasing function at most once, uniqueness holds in
(0, 1). Boundary checks conﬁrm no other maxima if R peaks interiorly.
The KKT condition (c) is obtained by setting the derivative to zero:
dUε
dλ = C′(E + ε) −CE′
(E + ε)2
= 0 =⇒C′(E + ε) = CE′.
Quasiconcavity ensures the critical point is a global max under the assumptions.
[Proof of Theorem 1 (Extended Sketch)] The proof relies on the ech cohomology exact
sequence for the cover U. Local sections si agree on pairwise intersections by (ii), deﬁning
a 0-cochain. The acyclicity assumption (iii) implies H1(U, F) = 0, so every 1-cocycle is
a coboundary, meaning the disagreement on triple intersections (obstruction to gluing)
vanishes. By the sheaf axiom, this extends to a global section s. Uniqueness follows from
the separation axiom: if two globals agree locally, they are identical [Godement(1958)].
[Proof of Corollary 2] Direct from the long exact sequence in cohomology: non-gluability
implies non-trivial class in ˇH1.
15

[Proof of Lemma 2] At λ⋆, Uε max implies max marginal gain C′/E′. Bandwidth
allocation ∝E(λ) ensures overlap covers mutual info threshold (by Shannon bounds),
forcing agreement on intersections. Thm. 1(iii) then applies for acyclicity.
16

References
[Barannikov et al.(2022)] Barannikov, Sergey and others. Sheaf Cohomology for Deep
Learning: Persistence and Multi-Modal Fusion. International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 1456-1478, 2022.
[Bodnar et al.(2023)] Bodnar, Cristian and others. Cohomological Transformers for Cir-
cuit Pruning in Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12345, 2023.
[Curry et al.(2018)] Curry, Howard and others. Applied Category Theory for Cognition
and AI. Cambridge University Press, 2018.
[Ebrahimi et al.(2021)] Ebrahimi, Mustafa and others. Sheaf Laplacians for Multi-Modal
Alignment in Vision-Language Models. Computer Vision and Image Understanding,
210:103-120, 2021.
[Godement(1958)] Godement, Roger. Topologie Algbrique et Thorie des Faisceaux. Her-
mann, Paris, 1958.
[Hansen and Ghrist(2023)] Hansen, Jakob and Ghrist, Robert. Sheaf Neural Networks: A
Framework for Machine Learning on Complex Data. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36:12345-12367, 2023.
[Leon(1990)] Leon, Mark. The Mechanics of Rationality. Southern Journal of Philosophy,
28(3):343-366, 1990.
[Robinson(2017)] Robinson, Michael. Sheaves in Network Theory and Multi-Agent Sys-
tems. Applied Network Science, 2(1):1-25, 2017.
[Wu et al.(2025)] Wu, Taiqiang, Yang, Runming, Liu, Tao, Wang, Jiahao, and Wong,
Ngai.
Revisiting Model Interpolation for Eﬃcient Reasoning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.10977, 2025.
17

