Mind at Work: Detecting Agency through Assembly and Action
Flyxion
September 10, 2025
Abstract
This monograph presents a comprehensive framework for detecting mind-like agency by integrating
the Effective Assembly Index for Mind Recognition (EAIMR) with the praxicon concept from cognitive
science. EAIMR quantifies the improbability of a system's structure arising from unguided processes,
adjusted for efficiency and amplified by coherence, while the praxicon provides a structured repository
of action representations bridging perceptual, semantic, and motor domains. By combining these, we
propose a robust method to identify agentic intelligence across neural systems, collective organisms,
ecosystems, and artificial intelligence, avoiding anthropocentric biases that marginalize non-narrative
minds, such as those with aphantasia, anendophasia, or ecological intelligences. The framework is for-
malized using information theory, graph theory, category theory, and sheaf theory, with applications in
neuroscience, AI alignment, ecological cognition, and cross-cultural studies. We address intersubjectivity
collapse as a structural risk, amplified by Big Tech's attention-compute arms race and ecological frag-
mentation, drawing parallels to historical critiques of industrialization. The monograph contrasts this
approach with competing theories, provides detailed case studies, and discusses ethical implications for
recognizing diverse minds. This extended edition includes multi-scale temporal dynamics, causal interven-
tion frameworks, compositional agency, quantitative validation studies, computational implementations,
statistical methods, phenomenological bridges, evolutionary dynamics, information-theoretic refinements,
AI alignment protocols, clinical applications, policy recommendations, bias mitigation strategies, com-
putational tractability improvements, and connections to plant cognition, collective intelligence, network
neuroscience, indigenous knowledge, and extended cognition.
1
Introduction
The quest to detect and understand agency—defined as the capacity of a system to pursue goals through
coordinated actions deviating from unguided physical processes—spans cognitive science, philosophy of mind,
artificial intelligence (AI), and ecology. Our civilization's bias toward equating intelligence with narrativity
and imagery, dominant human cognitive modes, systematically marginalizes alternative forms of intelligence.
As Michael Levin articulates, "mind blindness" leads us to dismiss the agency of plants, animals, and cellular
collectives because they lack human-like symbols or narratives [Levin, 2022]. Levin's work emphasizes that
intelligence is not brain-bound but present in any system capable of goal pursuit and adaptation, from
cellular regeneration to collective behaviors [Levin, 2019]. This bias extends to cognitive minorities, such as
individuals with aphantasia (inability to visualize mentally) or anendophasia (absence of inner monologue),
who face exclusion in narrative-driven economies despite intact functional reasoning [Zeman et al., 2015,
Hurlburt et al., 2024].
Big Tech's business model—selling compute and storage while buying attention through algorithmic
amplification—exacerbates this collapse. By spotlighting outlier success stories and suppressing systemic
critiques, platforms create a narrative arms race that erodes trust and shared meaning [Zuboff, 2019, Wu,
2016]. Programming courses exemplify this: an oversupply of training with undersupplied job demand cre-
ates a hope market, where platforms profit by amplifying rare successes while burying failures [Carr, 2010].
This dynamic parallels historical ecological critiques, from Joni Mitchell's "Big Yellow Taxi" lamenting the
paving of paradise for parking lots to Jim Amos's vision of a "Coruscant planet" where data centers and
nuclear plants displace ecosystems for a compute-driven metaverse [Lanham, 2006]. Roads, like digital feeds,
fragment habitats—disrupting migrations, raising heat islands, and diverting water—leading to biodiver-
sity loss, population isolation, and ecosystem degradation [Forman, 2003]. Both create isolated patches,
undermining exchange of animals or ideas, driving collapse [Arendt, 1958].
1

The Effective Assembly Index for Mind Recognition (EAIMR) and the praxicon framework offer a solution
by quantifying agency through structural complexity and action representation, bypassing narrativity bias
to recognize diverse intelligences. EAIMR measures the improbability of a system's assembly, adjusted for
reuse, parallelism, and degeneracy, and amplified by coherence [Walker and Davies, 2013]. The praxicon, a
cognitive "dictionary" of actions, bridges perceptual, semantic, and motor domains, grounding intelligence
in embodied processes [Pastra, 2011, Peigneux et al., 2004]. Together, they detect agency in systems from
neural circuits to termite mounds, forests, and AI, fostering inclusivity for non-human and atypical human
minds. This monograph integrates these frameworks with information theory, graph theory, category theory,
and sheaf theory, addressing applications in neuroscience, AI alignment, ecology, and cross-cultural cognition,
while situating intersubjectivity collapse as a meta-crux for debates on AI futures, such as those between
Yudkowsky's pessimism and Miller's cooperative optimism [Yudkowsky, 2008, Miller, 2006].
To appreciate this integration, it is essential to understand prerequisite concepts. Information theory,
pioneered by Claude Shannon, quantifies uncertainty and structure in systems through measures like entropy,
which represents the average information content or disorder in a probability distribution [Shannon, 1948].
Complexity measures, such as Kolmogorov complexity, define the shortest program capable of generating a
given structure, providing a basis for assessing improbability [Kolmogorov, 1965]. Assembly theory extends
these ideas to biological and technological contexts by counting the minimal steps required to construct com-
plex objects from simple building blocks [Walker and Davies, 2013]. The praxicon, rooted in neuropsychology,
models how the brain stores and retrieves action knowledge, distinguishing between perceptual recognition
and motor execution [Peigneux et al., 2004]. By weaving these threads together, our framework addresses
the challenge of detecting agency without relying on anthropocentric markers like language or self-report.
Furthermore, this work addresses "mind blindness," a term from Michael Levin's research describing the
human tendency to overlook intelligence in non-human systems due to their lack of narrative or imagistic
expression. This bias extends to cognitive minorities within humanity, such as individuals with aphantasia
(inability to visualize mentally) or anendophasia (lack of inner speech), who process information functionally
but are marginalized in narrative-dominant societies. Integrating these insights, the framework mitigates
intersubjectivity collapse—the breakdown of shared understanding among diverse minds—by recognizing
alternative intelligences through structural metrics like EAIMR.
2
Historical and Conceptual Foundations
2.1
Prerequisites: Complexity and Information in Natural Systems
Before delving into assembly theory, consider the foundational role of complexity in distinguishing living
and agentic systems from inert matter. Murray Gell-Mann's work on effective complexity highlights how
systems exhibit regularities that are neither too random nor too ordered, a balance often indicative of adap-
tive processes [Adami, 2012]. Robert Hazen's research on mineral evolution and biocomplexity introduces
functional information as a metric for the emergence of life-like properties, where improbable configurations
serve functional roles [Hazen et al., 2007]. These ideas set the stage for assembly theory, which quantifies
the "assembly index" as the minimal number of operations needed to produce a structure, emphasizing reuse
and hierarchy in evolved systems.
2.2
Assembly Theory and Complexity
Assembly theory, developed by Sara Imari Walker, Leroy Cronin, and collaborators, provides a formal
measure of complexity by calculating the shortest path to assemble a molecule or structure from basic
units [Cronin and Walker, 2016, Walker and Davies, 2013]. It has applications in astrobiology and origins-
of-life research, where high assembly indices correlate with biotic processes. EAIMR builds upon this by
incorporating adjustments for real-world efficiencies and coherence, enabling its use as a detector for mind-like
agency [Adami, 2012]. Loopholes in assembly index application—such as reuse of substructures, parallelism,
context dependence, degeneracy, and information leakage—highlight how complexity can bootstrap without
full cost, relevant to understanding emergent intelligences in swarms or ecosystems.
2

2.3
Praxicon: Action Representation in Cognition
The praxicon emerges from studies of apraxia, a disorder impairing purposeful movements despite intact
motor function.
Prerequisite knowledge includes the distinction between ideational apraxia (conceptual
deficits) and ideomotor apraxia (execution deficits), as modeled by Rothi and Heilman [Mantovani-Nagaoka
and Ortiz, 2010].
The praxicon is conceptualized as a dual-component system: the input praxicon for
recognizing actions via visual-gestural cues, and the output praxicon for producing motor engrams [Peigneux
et al., 2004]. Extensions to AI involve grounding symbolic language in sensorimotor primitives, addressing
the symbol grounding problem [Harnad, 1990, Pastra, 2011, Vannuscorps and Caramazza, 2023].
2.4
Competing Approaches
To contextualize our framework, compare it with alternatives. Integrated Information Theory (IIT) posits
consciousness as integrated information Φ, but it requires predefined system boundaries and struggles with
distributed agency [Tononi, 2004]. The Free Energy Principle (FEP) frames agents as minimizers of vari-
ational free energy, modeling predictive processing but lacking direct measures of structural improbability
[Friston, 2010]. Enactive cognition emphasizes autopoiesis and sensorimotor contingencies, yet it often re-
mains qualitative [Barandiaran et al., 2009]. Our EAIMR-praxicon approach complements these by providing
computable metrics grounded in assembly and action representation.
3
Mind Blindness and Intersubjectivity Collapse
Mind blindness, as articulated by Michael Levin, refers to the systematic failure to recognize intelligence in
non-human systems, such as plants, animals, and cellular collectives, because they do not conform to human-
like symbolic or narrative modes. Levin argues that intelligence is any system's ability to pursue goals, adapt
to perturbations, and solve problems in its medium, evident in regenerating limbs or bioelectric signaling
[Levin, 2019]. This bias extends beyond ecology to cognitive minorities within humanity, where individuals
with aphantasia—the inability to voluntarily create mental images—or anendophasia—the absence of inner
monologue—are marginalized despite functional processing capabilities.
Mind Blindness Across Domains
1. Ecological Minds (Plants and Animals) Bias: Intelligence is equated with language and narrative.
Blindness: Plants and animals operate through signaling, adaptation, and coordination, but because
they do not "speak," their intelligence is dismissed as instinct. Consequence: Systematic marginaliza-
tion of non-human agency, paving the way for ecological exploitation.
2. Cognitive Minorities (Aphantasia, Anendophasia, Atypical Cognition) Bias: Value is tied
to attention performance—vivid self-narration, imagery, persuasion. Blindness: Those whose minds
process functionally but without inner imagery or speech must reverse-engineer outputs, making them
invisible or "less capable" in the attention economy. Aphantasia affects 2-4% of the population, impair-
ing voluntary visualization, while anendophasia involves silent inner worlds without verbal thought.
Consequence: Social and economic exclusion of cognitive styles that do not match platform-optimized
norms.
3. Religious and Philosophical Systems (Christianity, Islam, Atheism, etc.) Bias: Each tradi-
tion assumes its own narrative or epistemic mode (ritual, revelation, rational critique) is the universal
medium of truth. Blindness: Values and intelligences encoded in rival traditions become illegible. What
one calls wisdom, another calls heresy or superstition. Consequence: Breakdown of shared meaning
across civilizations, escalating into mistrust, conflict, or war.
Unifying Thread: Across all three layers, mind blindness is the refusal to recognize the legitimacy of
intelligences that do not mirror our own mode of expression. This blindness is not just a moral failure—it is
a structural driver of intersubjectivity collapse, as communication, empathy, and trust fail across ecological,
cognitive, and cultural domains. AI futures will magnify this bias—if we only design for intelligences that
"talk like us," we will fail to cooperate with (or even recognize) those that do not.
3

3.1
Termite-Neuron-Forest Triad: Analogies for Detecting Emergent Intelli-
gence
In the context of intersubjectivity collapse—where diverse minds fail to communicate or recognize one an-
other due to incompatible cognitive modes—the "Termite-Neuron-Forest Triad" serves as a formal analogy
to highlight how emergent intelligence arises from swarms of simpler agents. This triad underscores the
structural bias of mind blindness, wherein intelligences lacking narrative or imagistic expression are dis-
missed, exacerbating collapse by excluding valid forms of agency.
By applying an assembly-index lens,
we can quantify the improbability of these emergent structures, revealing mind-like processes that operate
through coordination rather than human-centric symbolism.
1. Neurons as "Just Insects": The Swarm of Consciousness Neurons, individually, are simple
electrochemical agents following local rules of excitation and inhibition.
However, their collective
swarming—through synaptic connections, feedback loops, and hierarchical organization—assembles a
brain capable of consciousness and goal-directed behavior. The assembly index here is extraordinarily
high: the precise mesoscale architecture (e.g., cortical columns) is improbable under mindless diffusion,
implying directed processes like plasticity and learning. Mind blindness dismisses this as "mere biology"
until the emergent whole is recognized, mirroring how we overlook atypical human cognition (e.g.,
aphantasia) that lacks internal imagery.
2. Termites as "Just Insects":
The Swarm of Architecture Termites operate as decentralized
agents, responding to local pheromones and environmental cues.
Yet, their swarming constructs
mounds with advanced features: ventilation topology for thermoregulation, chambers for farming fungi,
and resilient structures against floods. The mound's assembly index exceeds that of random soil ac-
cumulations (e.g., dunes), reflecting collective intelligence in distributed sensing and adaptation. This
parallels neuronal swarming but in an ecological medium, where goals like colony survival manifest
without centralized control [Turner, 2000, Camazine et al., 2001].
3. Trees as "Just Plants": The Swarm of Ecosystem Intelligence Trees, fungi, and associated
organisms form a symbiotic swarm, with roots interleaving to share nutrients, signals propagating via
mycorrhizal networks, and collective responses to threats like drought or pests. The forest's assembly
index—encompassing trophic cycles, succession dynamics, and long-term resilience—is vastly higher
than random vegetation, indicating goal-directed processes at the ecosystem scale. This intelligence,
expressed through chemical and bioelectric signaling, evades mind blindness by lacking anthropomor-
phic traits [Levin, 2019].
Unifying Principle: Across the triad, intelligence emerges from local rules yielding globally improbable
assemblies, quantifiable via an effective assembly index adjusted for reuse (motifs like synaptic patterns or
root modules), parallelism (concurrent neural firing or fungal growth), and degeneracy (functional alterna-
tives).
Formally, let A(X) denote the raw assembly index of system X; the effective index EA(X) = A(X)/(R ·
P · D), where R, P, and D are reuse, parallelism, and degeneracy factors, signals agency when exceed-
ing thresholds derived from null models. This bypasses narrativity bias, aligning with Levin's emphasis
on goal pursuit in non-brain systems. In intersubjectivity collapse, unrecognized triadic minds accelerate
fragmentation.
To extend this triad, we incorporate plant cognition research, where mycorrhizal networks exhibit mem-
ory and decision-making, further challenging mind blindness [Calvo and Trewavas, 2021]. Collective intel-
ligence studies show how swarms scale agency [Camazine et al., 2001], while network neuroscience reveals
similar patterns in brain connectivity [Bassett and Sporns, 2017]. Indigenous knowledge systems offer non-
anthropocentric views of agency in nature [Kimmerer, 2013], enriching the framework with extended cognition
perspectives [Clark, 2010].
4

4
Formal Definitions
4.1
Prerequisites: Probabilistic Models and Generative Distributions
Understanding EAIMR requires familiarity with generative models. A null model P0(X) represents mindless
processes, such as stochastic diffusion or self-organization without goals, while a mind-like model P1(X)
incorporates agency, such as optimization toward functional setpoints. These distributions allow computation
of likelihoods and surprises, foundational to information-theoretic analyses [Cover and Thomas, 2006].
4.2
EAIMR Definition
For a system X described over an alphabet Σ, EAIMR is:
EAIMR(X) =
A(X)
R(X) · P(X) · D(X) · C(X),
where: - A(X): Raw Assembly Index, the minimal steps in an assembly grammar [Walker and Davies,
2013]. - R(X): Reuse factor, quantifying modular repetition. - P(X): Parallelism factor, accounting for
concurrent processes.
- D(X): Degeneracy factor, reflecting alternative configurations achieving similar
functions. - C(X): Coherence factor, amplifying goal-directed integration.
High values suggest agency, as the structure is improbable under P0(X) but plausible under P1(X).
4.3
Praxicon Definition
The praxicon is formalized as a bipartite graph GP = (VA, VS, E), with action vertices VA (e.g., motor
programs), semantic vertices VS (e.g., conceptual labels), and edges E encoding mappings [Panunzi and
Cignoni, 2018]. This structure facilitates bidirectional translation between perception and action, essential
for embodied cognition [Barsalou, 2008].
5
Mathematical Integration
5.1
Information-Theoretic Foundations
Self-information under the null: I0(X) = −log P0(X). The likelihood ratio Λ(X) = P1(X)/P0(X) quantifies
preference for agentic models. For praxicon integration, action entropy reduction is:
∆HP = H(P0) −Hobs(P),
updating coherence as C(X) ≈1+α∆HP /H(P0) [Shannon, 1948, Jaynes, 2003]. Kolmogorov complexity
approximates A(X) [Kolmogorov, 1965].
5.2
Graph-Theoretic Formalism
The praxicon graph GP allows coherence via spectral properties, e.g., eigenvalue stability for robustness.
EAIMR identifies low-entropy subgraphs indicative of agency [Newell, 1990].
5.3
Category-Theoretic Interpretation
Category theory provides a formal language for describing structures and transformations in abstract terms,
making it particularly suitable for modeling cognitive processes that involve mappings between different do-
mains [Healy and Phillips, 2022, Phillips, 2021]. A category consists of objects (e.g., perceptual states, motor
actions) and morphisms (transformations or relations between objects) that satisfy associativity and identity
axioms. Functors map between categories while preserving structure, and natural transformations provide
morphisms between functors. In our framework, the praxicon can be viewed as a functor F : Cperc →Cmotor,
where Cperc is the category of perceptual inputs (objects as sensory data, morphisms as perceptual trans-
formations) and Cmotor is the category of motor outputs (objects as action states, morphisms as motor
5

adjustments), mediated through a semantic category Csem. This functorial representation captures how per-
ceptual inputs are systematically transformed into motor actions via semantic grounding. EAIMR, in this
context, quantifies the "improbability" or cost of natural transformations η : F =⇒G, where G represents
alternative mappings (e.g., under null dynamics). High EAIMR corresponds to scenarios where the observed
natural transformation (the agentic mapping) is highly specific and unlikely under random perturbations, re-
flecting the coordinated agency. For instance, in neural systems, category-theoretic models can describe how
cognitive development involves composing functors for increasingly complex action representations [Ehres-
mann and Vanbremeersch, 1980]. This interpretation aligns with structuralist views in cognitive science,
emphasizing relational structures over material substrates [Ehresmann and Gomez-Ramirez, 2021].
5.4
Sheaf-Theoretic Interpretation
Sheaf theory extends category theory by addressing how local data on a topological space can be consistently
glued into global structures, offering a powerful tool for modeling distributed systems where agency emerges
from multi-scale interactions [Spivak et al., 2024]. A sheaf F on a space X assigns to each open set U ⊆X
a set F(U) (local data) with restriction maps that satisfy gluing conditions: local sections that agree on
overlaps can be uniquely combined into a global section. In biological and ecological contexts, sheaf theory
models uncertainty and resilience in complex networks [Stenzel et al., 2024]. For our framework, define a
sheaf F on the topological space representing the system's components (e.g., neurons in a circuit or species
in an ecosystem), where sections over open sets encode local praxicon fragments—action representations
valid in subsystems.
The gluing axiom ensures that local actions cohere into global behaviors, such as
coordinated foraging in ant colonies or nutrient cycling in forests. EAIMR quantifies obstructions to trivial
gluing, often captured by sheaf cohomology groups Hk(X, F). Non-zero cohomology indicates "twists" or
global inconsistencies under null models, corresponding to high improbability and thus agency. For example,
in ecology, forest nutrient networks form a sheaf where local flows (sections) glue into global cycles; high
H1 (non-exact cycles) elevates EAIMR, detecting emergent intelligence [Levin, 2019]. In biology, bioelectric
signaling can be sheafified, with cohomology measuring scale-free cognition [Levin, 2019, Spivak et al., 2024].
This approach bridges local computations to global agency, providing a mathematical basis for resilience
under perturbations.
6
Worked Examples
6.1
Neural Tissue
In neural systems, high A(X) arises from precise synaptic architectures, with praxicon engrams in cortical
columns reducing entropy. Simulations of mirror neurons show effector-specific mappings [Gallese and Gold-
man, 1998]. Step-by-step: Compute A(X) via connection counts, adjust discounts, amplify with coherence
from goal pursuit. Entropy curve: Sharp reduction in action space.
6.2
Termite Mound
Moderate assembly in tunnels, high coherence in thermoregulation.
Collective praxicon via pheromone-
guided motifs [Turner, 2000].
Graph: Nodes for worker actions linked to colony semantics.
Data from
self-organization models [Camazine et al., 2001].
6.3
Forest Ecosystem
Extensive macro-assembly in symbiotic networks, praxicon-like routing. High degeneracy in species roles,
coherence over timescales [Levin, 2019]. Lattice diagram: Interconnected trophic levels.
6.4
Negative Case: Crystal Growth
Regular lattice growth yields low C(X), high predictability under P0, resulting in low EAIMR [Hazen et al.,
2007].
6

7
Theoretical Extensions
To enhance the framework, we introduce multi-scale temporal dynamics with a temporal coherence com-
ponent Ct(X), measuring agency across timescales from neural firing to forest succession, distinguishing
long-term agency from patterns [Levin, 2019].
Causal intervention frameworks define an agency resilience index, quantifying recovery from targeted
disruptions versus noise, differentiating true agents from homeostatic systems [Barandiaran et al., 2009].
Compositional agency extends category theory for nested intelligences, where agents form collectives with
irreducible properties [Ehresmann and Gomez-Ramirez, 2021].
8
Empirical and Methodological Improvements
Quantitative validation studies are essential, including neural comparisons of healthy vs. lesioned tissue, eco-
logical manipulations of forests/termite colonies, AI benchmarks, and cross-cultural ritual analyses [Pastra,
2011].
Computational implementation requires open-source tools for EAIMR computation, with standardized
data formats, Kolmogorov approximation algorithms, and praxicon graph extraction methods [Kolmogorov,
1965].
Statistical framework includes confidence intervals on EAIMR, multiple comparison corrections, power
analysis for agency detection, and handling uncertainty [Jaynes, 2003].
9
Conceptual Deepening
The phenomenological bridge addresses consciousness: high EAIMR systems may exhibit phenomenal expe-
rience, with testable predictions for subjective states [Tononi, 2004].
Evolutionary dynamics predict higher EAIMR systems show distinct trajectories, testable in simulations
or comparative studies [Camazine et al., 2001].
Information-theoretic refinements connect EAIMR to integrated information, non-equilibrium thermody-
namics, and predictive processing [Friston, 2010].
10
Practical Applications
10.1
Neuroscience
Detects apraxia and atypical cognition [Peigneux et al., 2004, Zeman et al., 2015]. Clinical applications
include diagnostics for locked-in syndrome, rehabilitation monitoring, and therapeutic community agency
assessment [Levin, 2022].
10.2
AI and Robotics
Grounds LLMs; detects agency [Pastra, 2011, Anderson, 2007]. AI alignment protocols monitor emergent
agency during training, detect deceptive alignment, and measure value alignment via praxicon analysis
[Yudkowsky, 2008].
10.3
Ecological and Collective Minds
Identifies swarm intelligence [Camazine et al., 2001, Simondon, 2017]. Policy frameworks enable legal recogni-
tion of non-human agency, environmental protection based on ecosystem metrics, and AI regulation [Bostrom,
2014].
7

10.4
Cross-Cultural Cognition
Rituals as praxicons [Ortega y Gasset, 1961]. Anthropocentric bias mitigation involves cross-validation with
non-human measures, indigenous knowledge, and animal studies [Kimmerer, 2013].
11
Limits and Future Research
Challenges: Approximating complexity, validating sheaves. Computational tractability requires polynomial
approximations and hierarchical methods for large systems [Kolmogorov, 1965].
Future: Bioelectric models, AI simulations [Levin, 2019]. Connections to plant cognition [Calvo and
Trewavas, 2021], collective intelligence [Camazine et al., 2001], network neuroscience [Bassett and Sporns,
2017], indigenous knowledge [Kimmerer, 2013], and extended cognition [Clark, 2010].
12
Ethical and Philosophical Implications
Mitigates mind blindness, informs AI ethics, and aligns with process philosophy [Dennett, 1987, Whitehead,
1929, Deleuze and Guattari, 1987].
13
Decision Rule
EAIMR(X) ≥τ =⇒classify as mind-like (candidate)
14
Conclusion
This framework detects agency, averting intersubjectivity collapse by recognizing diverse minds.
A
Mathematical Appendix: EAIMR, Information, and Improbable
Order
A.1
Preliminaries and Notation
Let X denote a structure/system (e.g., termite mound, forest network, neural microcircuit) described over
an alphabet Σ. Let P0 be a null (mindless) generative model for X (e.g., stochastic physics + simple self-
organization) with distribution P0(X). Let P1 be a mind-like generative model for X (agentic/goal-directed)
with distribution P1(X). Raw Assembly Index A(X): minimum step count in a prescribed assembly grammar
to build X from primitives.
EAIMR:
EAIMR(X) =
A(X)
R(X) · P(X) · D(X) · C(X)
A.2
Connection to Kolmogorov Complexity
Let K(X) be prefix Kolmogorov complexity (shortest universal description of X). In general, lower K(X)
implies higher compressibility (simple regularities). Many mind-built artifacts have mixed profiles: globally
compressible high-level plan + low-level details that are costly to specify. A useful proxy is two-part MDL
(minimum description length):
L(X) ≈L(model) + L(residuals | model)
Heuristic link (non-rigorous but actionable):
8

EAIMR(X) ∝Kplan(X)
R · P · D · C
with Kplan(X) ≲K(X).
Kolmogorov complexity K(X) is the length of the shortest program p in a fixed universal Turing machine
U such that U(p) = X.
For EAIMR, we approximate Kplan(X) as the compressible plan component,
separating it from residuals using two-part coding, which aligns with practical compression algorithms like
LZW or gzip for estimation.
A.3
Statistical Surprise and Likelihood Ratios
Define the self-information under the null:
I0(X) ≡−log P0(X)
Λ(X) ≡P1(X)
P0(X) = exp (log P1(X) −log P0(X)) .
Key idea: High EAIMR should correlate with large Λ(X) and a high I0(X) (i.e., X is very unlikely under
mindless dynamics but plausible under mind-like dynamics). A practical surrogate score you can compute
or estimate:
S(X) ≡I0(X) + λϕ(X)
EAIMR(X) = g (S(X)) ,
g ↑
The likelihood ratio Λ(X) is the Bayes factor for mind-like vs. null models, with log Λ(X) as evidence
weight. For estimation, use Monte Carlo methods to approximate P0(X) and P1(X) from generative simu-
lations, such as Markov chain Monte Carlo for high-dimensional spaces.
A.4
Entropy Reduction, Work, and Directed Assembly
Let M be macrostate features (e.g., ventilation topology, nutrient routing, neural coding). Define macro-
entropy under P0 and observed for X. Directed assembly manifests as entropy reduction:
∆H ≡H(M) −Hobs(M) > 0
A convenient coherence multiplier:
C(X) ≈1 + α ∆H
H(M)
Entropy H(M) = −P pi log pi over macrostates, where pi is probability under P0. Observed Hobs(M) is
computed from empirical distributions, with ∆H quantifying work against thermodynamic disorder, linking
to non-equilibrium physics [Friston, 2010].
A.5
Reuse, Parallelism, Degeneracy as Information Discounts
Treat these as code-length discounts relative to the raw assembly plan.
Reuse: library motifs shorten
description. If motif dictionary has description amortized across instances, the effective bits per instance
drop. Model as a divisor on A(X). Parallelism: independent sub-assemblies compress as a product code;
wall-clock and effective complexity per unit time fall. Model as a divisor on A(X). Degeneracy: if many
alternatives achieve the same function, the description of "a solution" is shorter than "this specific solution."
Function-first coding reduces effective complexity; model as a divisor. This aligns your original formula with
MDL-style accounting: EAIMR rises when, despite these discounts, the remaining coordinated specification
is still large and functionally tight.
9

For reuse, R(X) = 1+log(number of motif instances/motif types), amortizing costs. Parallelism P(X) =
total operations/critical path length, capturing concurrency. Degeneracy D(X) = log(number of functional equivalents),
spreading probability mass.
A.6
Coherence via Control and Causal Graphs
Let G(X) be a causal graph extracted from X's dynamics. Define a control coherence term:
ϕ(X) = β1Stab(G) + β2GoalAcc(G) + β3Robust(G)
GoalAcc(G): accuracy tracking a specified functional setpoint (e.g., temperature band in termite mounds).
Robust(G): performance under noise/lesions (graceful degradation). Then use ϕ(X) inside or directly as
your multiplier.
Stab(G) can be graph Laplacian eigenvalues for stability; GoalAcc(G) as mean squared error from set-
point; Robust(G) as fraction of performance retained under simulated lesions, using graph pruning algo-
rithms.
A.7
Practical Estimation (Finite Data)
Because K(X) is uncomputable, rely on approximations: - Compression proxies: on suitable encodings
(graphs, fields, symbol streams). - Surprisal under null: fit P0 (e.g., generative physics sims, random
graphs) and estimate by Monte Carlo or density models.
- Function and coherence: quantify with
control/evaluation tasks (tracking error, energy efficiency, resilience curves). - Discounts: measure from
libraries (motif counts), concurrency (critical path vs. total ops), and function-equivalence classes (number
of viable variants).
For compression, use BZ2 or LZMA ratios as K(X) lower bounds. Monte Carlo for P0 uses 104-106
samples for convergence. Resilience curves fit to exponential decay models for Robust(G).
A.8
Worked Intuitions (Triad Examples)
Neural tissue: very high A(X) (precise mesoscale organization), strong C(X) (robust goal pursuit), dis-
counts present (columns, parallelism), yet EAIMR stays high mind-like. Termite mound: moderate A(X)
vs. dunes, high C(X) (thermoregulation), sizable discounts (motifs, parallel labor, many workable designs)
but coordinated control keeps EAIMR high. Forest: extremely high macro A(X) vs. random vegetation,
high robustness/goal achievement (nutrient routing, succession), massive reuse/degeneracy, yet coherence
over centuries pushes EAIMR high.
A.9
Decision Rule (Operational)
Define thresholds from a reference set of clearly mindless assemblies:
EAIMR(X) ≥τ =⇒classify as mind-like (candidate)
Takeaway
Information-theoretic view: EAIMR is a mind detector for improbably coherent order—high surprisal
under a null, discounted for shortcuts, and boosted by functional integration. It sidesteps narrativity bias:
you do not need language or imagery to register as intelligent; termite colonies, forests, and atypical human
cognition can score high if they assemble and maintain low-entropy, goal-directed structure against default
dynamics.
A.10
Derivations and Pseudocode
EAIMR Derivation
From surprisal: S(X) = I0(X) + λϕ(X), EAIMR as monotonic g(S(X)).
Pseudocode
10

def compute_eaimr(X, P0, P1, G_P):
A = assembly_index(X)
R = reuse_factor(X)
P = parallelism(X)
D = degeneracy(X)
C = coherence(G_P)
return (A / (R * P * D)) * C
References
Christoph Adami. The use of information theory in evolutionary biology. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 1256(1):49-65, 2012. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06422.x.
John R. Anderson. How Can the Human Mind Occur in the Physical Universe? Oxford University Press,
2007.
Hannah Arendt. The Human Condition. University of Chicago Press, 1958.
Xabier E. Barandiaran, Ezequiel Di Paolo, and Marieke Rohde. Defining agency: Individuality, normativity,
asymmetry and spatio-temporality in action.
Adaptive Behavior, 17(5):367-386, 2009.
doi: 10.1177/
1059712309343819.
Lawrence W. Barsalou. Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59:617-645, 2008. doi: 10.1146/
annurev.psych.59.103006.093639.
Danielle S. Bassett and Olaf Sporns. Network neuroscience. Nature Neuroscience, 20(3):353-364, 2017. doi:
10.1038/nn.4502.
Nick Bostrom. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford University Press, 2014.
Paco Calvo and Anthony Trewavas.
Cognition and intelligence of green plants. information for animal
scientists. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 564:78-85, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.
2020.07.029.
Scott Camazine, Jean-Louis Deneubourg, Nigel R. Franks, James Sneyd, Guy Theraulaz, and Eric Bonabeau.
Self-Organization in Biological Systems. Princeton University Press, 2001.
Nicholas Carr. The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains. W. W. Norton & Company, 2010.
Andy Clark. Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension. Oxford University Press,
2010.
Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory. Wiley, 2nd edition, 2006. doi:
10.1002/047174882X.
Leroy Cronin and Sara Imari Walker. Beyond prebiotic chemistry. Science, 352(6290):1174-1175, 2016. doi:
10.1126/science.aaf6310.
Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari.
A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia.
University of
Minnesota Press, 1987.
Daniel C. Dennett. The Intentional Stance. MIT Press, 1987.
Andrée C. Ehresmann and Jaime Gomez-Ramirez.
Category theory and foundations of life science: A
structuralist perspective on cognition. BioSystems, 202:104358, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2021.
104358.
Andrée C. Ehresmann and Jean-Paul Vanbremeersch. A category theory approach to cognitive development.
Cognitive Science, 4(3):247-274, 1980. doi: 10.1207/s15516709cog0403_2.
11

Richard T. T. Forman. Road ecology: Science and solutions, 2003.
Karl Friston. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2):127-138,
2010. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787.
Vittorio Gallese and Alvin Goldman. Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of mind-reading. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 2(12):493-501, 1998. doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(98)01262-5.
Stevan Harnad. The symbol grounding problem. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 42(1-3):335-346, 1990.
doi: 10.1016/0167-2789(90)90087-6.
Robert M. Hazen, Patrick L. Griffin, James M. Carothers, and Jack W. Szostak. Functional information and
the emergence of biocomplexity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 104(Suppl 1):8574-8581, 2007. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0701744104.
Michael J. Healy and Steven Phillips. What is category theory to cognitive science? compositional represen-
tations and transformations. Frontiers in Psychology, 13:1048975, 2022. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1048975.
Russell T. Hurlburt, Christopher L. Heavey, and Eric Schwitzgebel.
Not everyone has an inner voice:
Behavioral consequences of anendophasia. Psychological Science, 2024. doi: 10.1177/09567976241243004.
Edwin T. Jaynes.
Probability Theory: The Logic of Science.
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
doi:
10.1017/CBO9780511790423.
Robin Wall Kimmerer. Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scientific Knowledge, and the Teachings
of Plants. Milkweed Editions, 2013.
Andrei N. Kolmogorov. Three approaches to the quantitative definition of information. Problems of Infor-
mation Transmission, 1(1):1-7, 1965.
Richard A. Lanham. The Economics of Attention: Style and Substance in the Age of Information. University
of Chicago Press, 2006.
Michael Levin. The computational boundary of a "self": Developmental bioelectricity drives multicellularity
and scale-free cognition. Frontiers in Psychology, 10:2688, 2019. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02688.
Michael Levin. Technological approach to mind everywhere: An experimentally-grounded framework for
understanding diverse bodies and minds. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 16:768201, 2022. doi: 10.
3389/fnsys.2022.768201.
Juliana Mantovani-Nagaoka and Karin Zazo Ortiz. Reviewing the limb apraxia concept: From definition to
cognitive neuropsychological models. Dementia & Neuropsychologia, 4(3):165-172, 2010. doi: 10.1590/
S1980-57642010DN40300002.
Mark S. Miller.
Robust Composition: Towards a Unified Approach to Access Control and Concurrency
Control. PhD thesis, John Hopkins University, 2006.
Allen Newell. Unified Theories of Cognition. Harvard University Press, 1990.
José Ortega y Gasset. Meditations on Quixote. W. W. Norton & Company, 1961. Original work published
1914.
Alessandro Panunzi and Lorenzo Cignoni. The imagact ontology of actions. In Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), 2018.
Katerina
Pastra.
Praxicon:
The
development
of
a
grounding
resource.
In
Proceedings
of
the
International
Workshop
on
Human-Agent
Interaction,
2011.
URL
https://www.
semanticscholar.org/paper/PRAXICON-%3A-The-Development-of-a-Grounding-Resource-Pastra/
f08b0e82aedd1e535ab736758fbfa9388c9efa6a.
12

Philippe Peigneux, Martial Van der Linden, Gaëtan Garraux, Steven Laureys, Christian Degueldre, Joël
Aerts, Guy Del Fiore, Gustave Moonen, André Luxen, and Eric Salmon.
Imaging a cognitive model
of apraxia: The neural substrate of gesture-specific cognitive processes. Human Brain Mapping, 21(3):
119-142, 2004. doi: 10.1002/hbm.10161.
Steven Phillips. A category theory principle for cognitive science. Cognitive Studies: Bulletin of the Japanese
Cognitive Science Society, 28:1-11, 2021.
Claude E. Shannon.
A mathematical theory of communication.
Bell System Technical Journal, 27(3):
379-423, 1948. doi: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.x.
Gilbert Simondon. On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects. Univocal Publishing, 2017. Original work
published 1958.
David I. Spivak, Joshua Tanzer, and John D. Foley. Sheaf theory: from deep geometry to deep learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15476, 2024.
Ian Stenzel et al. Exploring sheaf theory for improving structural equation modeling in biogeosciences. AGU
Fall Meeting Abstracts, 2024:B53B-1743, 2024.
Giulio Tononi. An information integration theory of consciousness. BMC Neuroscience, 5(1):42, 2004. doi:
10.1186/1471-2202-5-42.
J. Scott Turner. The Extended Organism: The Physiology of Animal-Built Structures. Harvard University
Press, 2000.
Gilles Vannuscorps and Alfonso Caramazza.
Effector-specific motor simulation supplements core ac-
tion recognition processes in adverse conditions.
Scientific Reports, 13(1):19482, 2023.
doi: 10.1038/
s41598-023-46835-2.
Sara Imari Walker and Paul C. W. Davies. The algorithmic origins of life. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface, 10(79):20120869, 2013. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2012.0869.
Alfred North Whitehead. Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology. Macmillan, 1929.
Tim Wu. The Attention Merchants: The Epic Scramble to Get Inside Our Heads. Knopf, 2016.
Eliezer Yudkowsky. Artificial intelligence as a positive and negative factor in global risk. In Nick Bostrom
and Milan M. Ćirković, editors, Global Catastrophic Risks, pages 308-345. Oxford University Press, 2008.
Adam Zeman, Michaela Dewar, and Sergio Della Sala.
Lives without imagery - congenital aphantasia.
Cortex, 73:378-380, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.05.019.
Shoshana Zuboff. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier
of Power. PublicAffairs, 2019.
13

