Standard Galactic Edition
Monica's Little Pills
Monica's 
Little
Pills
By Monica Anderson
Edited by Flyxion

The Blue Pill -- Self-improving AI.
Self-improving AI is a meme that has been 
circulating since the 1980s. Current 
proponents of the idea include Boström and 
Omohundro. My own summary goes something 
like this:
If we get any kind of AGI going, no matter how 
slow it is and how buggy it is, we can give it 
access to its own source code and let it analyze 
it and clean up and fix the bugs and then re-
write its code to be as good as it can make it. 
We then start up this slightly smarter AGI and 
repeat the process until the AGIs get 
superintelligent.
On the surface, this is irrefutable. We 
already have examples of systems improving 
themselves: We can buy a cheap 3D printer and 
then quite cheaply print out parts for a much 
better 3D printer. Or to make computer chips 

that go into computers that design better 
computer chips.
Not to mention evolution of all species in 
nature.
I look at it from an Epistemologist's point of 
view and say "That's a Hardline Reductionist 
idea that should not have made it out of the 
20th century".
The idea, as its inception, imagined an AGI as 
something that was written by teams of human 
programmers using software development tools 
and mathematical equations.
But I think the only thing that even 
approximates this outcome is that the code is 
perfect, and humans as well as machines all 
agree there are no more improvements to be 
made. And the resulting AGIs are still not 
superintelligent.
The most likely outcome is that we all realize 
the folly in this argument and won't even try.

It's not about the code.
The number of lines of code in AI related 
projects has been declining rapidly.
2004,  6 million  FOPC slash CykeL propositions 
for Cyke.
2012, 34,000 lines .py .cuda Krizhevsky et al 
for Imagenet.
2013, 1,571 lines of Lua to play Atari games.
2017, 196 lines of Karis to implement Deep 
Dream.
2018 , less than 100 lines of Karis for 
research paper level results.
And all of these (Except Cyke, included as 
the most famous example of a 20th century 
Reductionist AI system) demonstrates new 
levels of power of Machine Learning.
The limits to intelligence are not in the code. 
In fact, they are not even technological.
The limit of intelligence is the complexity of 
the world. Omniscience is unavailable. The 
main purpose of intelligence is to guess, to 

jump to conclusions on scant evidence, and to 
do it well, based on a large set of historical 
patterns of problems and their solutions or 
events and their consequences.
Because scant evidence is all we will ever 
have.
We don't even know what goes on behind our 
back.
And because all intelligence is guessing, I have 
repeatedly claimed that "All Intelligences 
Are Fallible".
We are already making machines that are 
better than humans in some aspect of guessing. 
Protein Folding and playing Go are examples of 
this.
And these machines will get bigger and better 
at what they do and will be superhuman in 
various ways and in many problem domains, 
simply based on larger capacity to hold, lookup, 
or search useful patterns.

The code doing that can be hand-optimized to 
the point where any AI improvement would be 
insignificant. My own code in the inner loop for 
Understanding any language on the planet 
(once it has learned it, in "inference mode") is 
about 90 lines of Java. We can expect at best 
minor improvements to efficiency and speed.
It comes down to the corpus. In my domain, NLU, 
simple tests can be scored at 100% after a few 
minutes of learning on a laptop. Continued 
learning for days and weeks would provide a 
larger sample set of vocabulary-in-
appropriate-contexts which would mainly 
correct misunderstandings in corner cases. But 
these corpora are not comparable, by several 
orders of magnitude, to the gathered life 
experience of a human at age 25.
The main limit of intelligence is corpus size in a 
ML situation.

Future Artificial Intelligences will be nothing 
like what AGI fans have been fear-mongering 
about. These are 20th century Reductionist AI 
ideas; the proponents are blind to the most 
fundamental basics of epistemology. 
Reductionist Good Old-Fashioned AI has been 
demonstrated to being inferior in their own 
domains to even semi-trivial Machine Learning 
methods.
We need AGL, not AGI.
Machines learning to code.
As of this writing, there are a handful of 
available code-writing systems based on ML 
technology that has learned from large 
quantities of open source code, for example 
GitHub Copilot, Open AI Codex, and Amazon Code 
Whisperer.
They have not yet surpassed human 
programmers.

But it's not about writing code either. AIs 
writing code is about as silly as AI magazine 
covers with pictures of robots typing (wink 
wink?).
In the future, if we want a computer to do 
something, we will have a conversation 
(speaking and listening) with the computer. 
The conversation is at the level of discussing-
a problem with a competent coworker or 
professional.
It may spontaneously ask clarifying questions. I 
call this "Contiguously Rolling Topic, Mixed 
Initiative Dialog"; others tock of these bots as 
Dialogue Agents. But this will go beyond Siri or 
Alexa. And when the computer Understands 
exactly what you want done. it just does it. 
Why would Reductionist style programming be a 
necessary step?
Yes, there will still be lots of places where 
we want to use code. But whether that code is 

written by humans or AIs will make much less 
of a
difference than we might expect based on 
today's use of computers.
The Pink Pill -- The Wisdom Salon.
Wisdom Salon is an online World Cafe. The 
World Cafe Protocol is a recipe for organizing 
"Conversations That Matter" on a large scale. 
Thousands of people can cooperate in order to 
bring clarity to complex issues .
This is a post mortem summary for my 
interrupted Wisdom Salon project. I have all 
the code in an archive, but it requires a 
complete rewrite in order to fix the two 
biggest problems: The switch from Flash, yeck, 
to HTML5 for video and the cost of video 
connections. I know how to fix these but I'm 
busy working on Understanding Machines, at 

the moment. I am looking for someone to take 
this over. I also observe that there is a need 
for something like this. I see things discussed 
on Quora that would make good topics for a 
Wisdom Salon. I happen to believe video and 
spoken words are an important component for 
many reasons.
Wisdom.
Knowledge and Information can easily be found 
on the web. But what about Wisdom?
Intelligence is based on gathered knowledge.
Wisdom is based on gathered experience.
To get wiser, seek out more experiences. 
Engage yourself. Do more stuff. Travel. Talk 
to people to share their experiences. 
Conversation with others is the easiest way to 
gain Wisdom. But not all conversations are 
equal.
We want Conversations That Matter.

The World Cafe Protocol
The World Cafe Protocol is a recipe for 
organizing such "Conversations That Matter" on 
a large scale. Thousands of people can 
cooperate in order to bring clarity to complex 
issues. To find out more, buy the book or 
study the World Cafe Website, but this is how 
it typically works:
In some conference facility or gymnasium, the 
organizers provide dozens to hundreds of 
square tables. Each has four chairs, a box of 
crayons, and a piece of butcher paper as a 
tablecloth.
Stakeholders from all walks of life get 
invited and sit down at the tables. This could 
be a mixture of farmers, teachers, politicians. 
In corporate environments, sometimes this 
is everybody in the company.
Organizers now unveil a carefully phrased 
focusing Question as the topic of the 
conversations. It is important that The 

Question is positive and focusing. For education 
reform, don't ask "What is wrong with our 
education system". Instead, ask "What could a 
great school also be".
The four people at each table now start a 
conversation around The Question. Everyone 
takes notes on the butcher paper, using the 
crayons.
After twenty minutes, a gong rings. Three 
people - everyone except "South" in Duplicate 
Bridge terms - at each table get up and move 
to other tables at random. Three fresh 
random people sit down at each table.
"South" now first explains to the newcomers 
what the notes on the tablecloth mean. This 
provides a kind of lightweight continuity from 
the previous conversation at this table. The 
three newcomers comment on these notes and 
add fresh comments - the best parts of what 
was said at their previous tables. These 

conversations unfold very naturally. Four 
strangers can easily have a friendly 
conversation about complex things that matter. 
They don't even half to introduce 
themselves. They contribute their wisdom and 
experiences, not their résumés.
Conversations now continue for another 
twenty minutes. The gong rings again, and the 
shuffling repeats.
After 2 to 3 hours, the session is over and 
the butcher papers are gathered by the 
organizers into what is called "The Harvest". 
They are summarized and some time later - 
perhaps "after lunch" -- the results are 
shared with all the stake-holders.
Why this works so well.
Someone pushing a bad idea of theirs at every 
table can spam at worst 27 people in three 
hours. A good idea, introduced at the first 
table and repeated by all participants at 

subsequent tables, will reach over 100,000 
people or the majority of the audience, 
whichever is smaller. This is the filtering 
power of the World Cafe Protocol.
Wisdom Salon is an online World Cafe.
Sadly, the Wisdom Salon project has been 
suspended because of changing infrastructure 
and cost structure for online video 
transmissions, and because of lack of time on 
my part. It is possible to restart the project 
using current video technology and with 
funding and a larger team. If interested in 
contributing to this, please get in touch.
What follows is the original high level design 
specification, written in the present tense:
Design Specification.
The Wisdom Salon is a twenty-four seven 
online World Cafe implemented as a video chat 
site.

Conversations have four participants but 
each conversation can also have a passive and 
quiet audience of any size.
All conversations are always public.
All conversation participants are known by 
their login identities.
Why would anyone want to participate? The 
main purpose of Wisdom Salon is increased 
wisdom and improved clarity in complex issues 
for the participants. This is your main benefit; 
this is why you would want to participate. You 
will not get likes, but you might earn a local 
currency, called "Influ-ons", that you can 
selectively use to extend your influence.
Goal.
The goal is specifically NOT to find the best 
Grains of Wisdom in the Harvest; the grains 
are there mainly to provide continuity and 
shorten the time to get to talking about things 
that matter. The system is there to provide 
the users a chance to analyze large and 

complex issues with others in conversation, in 
an exchange of experiences.
Do not underestimate how different an 
interactive conversation is from a web 
search or reading a book.
Have you ever spent days studying 
something without "getting it" only to have 
someone set you straight in two minutes of 
conversation?
Have you ever been in a meeting where 
the resolution is something none of the 
participants even understood when the 
meeting started?
Sample Questions.
What kinds of Questions demonstrate the 
power of The Wisdom Salon? Consider these 
samples:
I am considering a mid-life career change. 
WHAT MATTERS?
Where should I retire, and why there?

Should I pursue a career in engineering or 
medicine?
Lifestyle design in interesting times
What is the true promise of genetics 
research and why should I care?
What movies should I let my children 
watch, and why?
Musical education for my child - WHAT 
MATTERS? What instruments, and why?
What is it really like to be a soldier in 
places like Afghanistan and Iraq?
Should I retire in Costa Rica ?
User Experience.
People arrive when they want and leave when 
they want. They can engage in multiple ways:
Upon entering the site, users are 
presented with the (at the moment) most 
popular conversation - the one with the 
largest audience.

Below the conversation there will be a 
list of other popular conversations, headed 
by conversations on topics the user may 
have watched or previously participated in.
They can browse all ongoing conversations 
much like watching talk shows on television.
They can select from hundreds of 
Questions to find something that interest 
them, or add their own.
Instead of a butcher paper, they can 
leave notes on each Question known as 
"Grains of Wisdom" to provide the 
lightweight continuity from table to table.
They can vote on these Grains of Wisdom 
so that the better results rise to the top. 
Results are immediately visible to all.
They can observe what other people say 
and how they behave and modify their own 
social graph to improve their chances of 
interaction with the best people.

A local currency is earned by passive 
engagement per hour, more of it is earned 
by participating in conversations, and the 
currency is used to pay for the privilege 
of posting a comment. Because posting costs 
currency, spamming the Grains of Wisdom 
will be limited.
A topic without currently active 
conversations still allows you to browse 
the Grains of Wisdom on the topic, and if 
you have Influ-ons, you can vote on the 
Grains (or notes) that you like or otherwise 
agree with, and you can restart the topic by 
creating a table and hope others will join.
Four Main Uses of Wisdom Salon.
The site ENABLES, but doesn't ENFORCE the 
World Cafe protocol. You can use the site for 
several different purposes:
As entertainment and education, 
passively watching conversations among your 

peers, much like flipping channels on 
television.
To get both factual information and 
broad-ranging personalized advice from 
experts.
To share your expertise in fields you 
understand. To do "micro mentoring".
To find an audience for storytelling and 
sharing personal experiences from your 
life.
To gain wisdom and personal clarity in 
complex issues.
To debate the major issues of the day in-
person in productively selected and well 
behaved groups.
To find new interesting and competent 
friends by observing their behavior and 
then befriending them, much like other 
social media.

Any active conversation starts a 20 minute 
"clock bar" moving. You can leave anytime. 
System provides some incentive to stay the 
full 20 minutes. On the other hand, you don't 
half to leave after twenty minutes. If you 
like, you can continue conversation a long as 
you want. But we expect a large fraction of 
people to adhere to the protocol. We believe 
this maximizes the wisdom gain per session.
Without the right people, the system is 
worthless.
Do not be discouraged. Facebook would be 
worthless with only ten people on it. Wisdom 
Salon really requires at least 50 people to be 
on the system before you are likely to find a 
conversation around a question you actually 
care about anytime you join. So nobody knows if 
this will work or not, and it may take a while 
before the system matures enough to attract 
a sufficient repeat audience to become what I 
designed it for. If you don't like it at first, 

please try again; it might well improve, and you 
might get lucky to get into an amazing 
conversation when you least expect it.
Welcome to my experiment.
The Lavender Pill -- Model Free AI.
Don't Model the World - just Model the Mind.
It's a lot easier. With some poetic freedom, I'd 
like to claim:
1. Model the World: ten billion lines of 
code.
2. Model the Brain: ten million lines of 
code.
3. Model the Mind: ten thousand lines of 
code.
#1 is regular programming. We make computers 
perform actions in a context that matches the 
programmer's mental Model of some relevant 
parts of the world.

#2 is Neuroscience-based Models of neurons, 
sighnapses and other biological structures and 
systems in brains.
#3 is Epistemology-based "Models" of 
Learning, Understanding, Reasoning, Prediction, 
Abstraction, and other Holistic and Emergent 
phenomena.
Epistemology-based Methods require  a rather 
minimal infrastructure to support whatever 
operations these concepts require.
I put "Models" within irony quotes because 
they are strictly-speaking meta-Models 
because they are used in meta-skills. They 
are not about skills, such as English or folding 
proteins, they are about how to acquire such 
skills:
By Learning from our mistakes.
The Purple Pill -- Corpus Congruence.

Understanding in brains and machines can be 
defined and measured as Corpus Congruence. 
Corpus Congruence as a metric spans up almost 
all of NLP. 
Understanding in brains and machines can be 
defined and measured as Corpus Congruence.
Let's consider this in the Machine Learning 
sense. If a machine is Model Free (Holistic), as 
all general Understanders half to be in order 
to not get trapped into a limited Model, then 
all it ever knows comes from the corpus it was 
trained on. And all it really can say is "This is 
more like my corpus than that". Or "This is 
more like these documents in my corpus than 
those"
Corpus Congruence as a metric spans up almost 
all of NLP. Because most of NLP is DawkcSim in 
various guises.
Given two documents A and B in some corpus, a 
classifier can say that an unknown document, 

which we can call "U",  is more like A than B. 
Given this capability, we can build:
- Classification and Clustering, by using A, B, 
up to N as defining classes.
- Filtering, by using A, wanted docs and B, 
unwanted docs.
- Sentiment Analysis, by using A, negative docs, 
and B, positive docs.
- Entity Extraction, by softly matching terms 
against lists of known entities.
- DawkcSim -- Find me more documents like 
this one.
Reductionist NLP uses all of these at the "bag 
of words" or "word count" levels for things 
like web search, spam filtering, and 
clustering. Holistic NLU aims to do the same 
based on the meanings expressed in sentences 
and paragraphs.
But "Semantic" Corpus Congruence is still 
Corpus Congruence.

Common Sense now becomes "Is the proposition 
before me congruent with my entire World 
Model, as acquired by learning things from my 
training corpus?". If it is well known, then we 
can likely ignore it this time.
And if it is not, then the next question will 
be "Is it close enough that it might be 
worthwhile extending the World Model with 
this information?"
If the answer is no, then the input is by its 
definition nonsense. Otherwise it is either a 
new fact or a lie, but since we cannot tell, we 
half to accept it; possibly with a note that 
this is fresh, untested knowledge that may 
turn out to be irrelevant, false, 
counterproductive, or noise.
Next we can note that it doesn't matter 
whether "documents" are text or images. Or 
input from a point cloud of sensors for robots 
or autonomous vehicle sensors.

And finally we can note that this definition 
also holds for humans if we take our "corpus" 
to be "Everything we've experienced since 
birth".
Monika's Little Pills.
Chapter One.
Why AI works.
Intelligence = Understanding + Reasoning.
Interest in Artificial Intelligence is exploding, 
and for good reasons. Computers in cars, phone 
apps, and on the web can do amazing things that 
we simply could not do before 2012. What's 
going on?
This is an attempt to explain the current 
state of AI to a general audience without using 
mathematics, computer science, or 
neuroscience; discussions at these levels 

would focus on how AI works. Here I will 
discuss this at the level of Epistemology and 
will try to explain why it works.
"Epistemology" sounds scary, but it really 
isn't. It's mostly scary because it is unknown; 
it is not taught in schools anymore. Which is a 
problem, because we now desperately need 
this branch of Philosophy to guide our AI 
development. Epistemology discusses things 
like Reasoning, Understanding, Learning, 
Novelty, problem solving in the abstract, how 
to create Models of the world, et cetera. 
These are all concepts one would think would 
be useful when working with artificial 
intelligences. But most practitioners enter 
the field of AI without any exposure to 
Epistemology which makes their work more 
mysterious and frustrating than it has to be.
I think of Epistemology as the general base 
for everything related to knowledge and 
problem solving; Science forms a small special 

case subset domain where we solve well-
formed problems of the kind that Science is 
best at. In Epistemology outside of Science we 
are free to productively also discuss pre-
scientific problem solving strategies, which is 
what brains are using most of the time. More 
later.
Intelligence = Understanding + Reasoning.
In his book "Thinking Fast and Slow", Daniel 
Khanammin discusses the idea that human minds 
use two different and complementary 
processes, two different modes of thinking, 
which we call Understanding and Reasoning. 
The idea has been discussed for decades and 
has been verified using psychological studies 
and by neuroscience.

"Subconscious Intuitive Understanding" is the 
full name of the "Fast Thinking" or "System 
1" thinking. It is fast because the brain can 
perform many parts of this task in parallel. 
The brain spends a lot of effort on this task.
"Conscious Logical Reasoning" is the full name 
of "Slow Thinking" or "System 2" thinking. To 
many people's surprise, this is very rarely 

used in practice. My soundbite for this is "You 
can make breakfast without Reasoning". 
Almost everything we do on a daily basis in our 
rich mundane reality is done without a need to 
reason about it. We just repeat whatever 
worked last time we performed this task; we 
are experience driven.
"Intuitive" means that the system can very 
quickly "provide solutions" to very complex 
problems but those solutions may not be 
correct every time.
"Logical" means that answers are always 
correct as long as input data is correct and 
sufficient. Which is not true in our rich 
mundane reality; it can only be true in a 
mathematically pure "Model" space. If you 
like Logic, you must also like Models.
"Subconscious" means we have no conscious 
("introspective") access to the these 
processes. You are reading this sentence and 

you understand it fully but you cannot 
explain to anyone, including 
yourself, how or why you understand it.
"Conscious" means we are aware of the 
thought; we can access it through introspection 
and we may find reasons to why we believe a 
certain idea.
"Expensive" is on the list because brains 
spend most of their effort on this 
Understanding part. We really shouldn't be 
surprised that AI now requires very powerful 
computers. More later.
In contrast, Reasoning is "Efficient". It is 
most useful when you are stuck in a novel 
situation where experience and Understanding 
doesn't help you. Or perhaps you need to plan 
ahead, or need to find reasons for why 
something happened after the fact. It is used 
at a formal level in the sciences. Reasoning is 
important, but just rarely needed or used.

Finally, Understanding is "Model Free" and 
Reasoning is "Model Based". This is likely the 
most important distinction to people who are 
implementing intelligent systems since it 
provides a way to keep the implementation on 
the correct path when the going gets rough. 
We cannot discuss these issues quite yet, but 
if you are curious you can watch the videos 
at vimeo.com , which discuss this distinction at 
length. Think of their appearance in this 
table as a kind of foreshadowing.
All of this groundwork allows me to state the 
main point of this section. We have known for a 
long time that brains use these two modes. 
But the AI research community has been 
spending overmuch effort on the Reasoning 
part and has been ignoring the Understanding 
part for sixty years.
We had several good reasons for this. Until 
quite recently, our machines were too small to 
run any useful sized neural network. And 

also, we didn't have a clue about how to 
implement this Understanding. But that is 
exactly what changed in 2012 when a group of 
AI researchers from Toronto effectively 
demonstrated that Deep Neural Networks 
could provide a simple kind of shallow and 
hollow proto-Understanding (well, they 
didn't call it that, but I do). I will look just a 
little into the future, and overstate this 
just a little, in order to make it more 
memorable:

Deep Neural Networks can provide 
Understanding.
This new phase of AI took decades to develop, 
but it would never have happened without 
people like the group led by Geoffrey Hinton 
at the University of Toronto, who spent 34+ 
years to develop the Deep Neural Network 
technology we now call "Deep Learning". A 

number of breakthroughs from 1997 to 2006 
led to a number of successful demonstrations 
(including first prizes in AI competitions) in 
2012, and we therefore count this year as the 
birth year of Machine Understanding.
To an outsider, it may look like an older 
program or phone app might be 
"Understanding" whatever the app is doing, 
but that Understanding really only happened 
in the mind of the programmer creating the 
app. The programmer first simplified the 
problem in their own head by discarding a lot 
of irrelevant detail using "Programmer's 
Understanding". This simplified mental 
"Model" of the problem domain could then be 
explained to a computer in the form of a 
computer program.
What is changing is that computers are now 
making these Models themselves.

The first bullet point describes regular 
programming, including "old style AI" programs. 
AI has, since 1955, provided many novel and 
brilliant algorithms that we now use in 
programs everywhere. But when you contrast 
old style AI to Understanding systems, the old 
kind of AI is basically indistinguishable from 
any other kind of programming we do nowadays.

The second bullet point describes the recent 
developments. Deep Neural Networks are so 
different from regular programs that we 
half to acknowledge them as a different 
computational paradigm. This is why they took 
almost four decades to develop. And the 
paradigm, being pre-scientific and Model Free, 
is difficult to grasp if you received a solid 
Reductionist and Model Based education; it 
takes a long time for an established AI 
practitioner or experienced programmer to 
switch. People who are just starting out in AI 
have an easier time assimilating this new 
paradigm since they haven't had a full 
career's worth of experience and success 
using old style AI techniques.
The amount of work we have to do to get a 
Deep Neural Network to Understand is 
surprisingly small, and companies like Google 
and Sintea-ents are working on eliminating the 
remaining effort of programming Neural 

Networks. This is where things will get really 
weird: when the Deep Neural Network (Dee 
ennenn) Understands enough about the world 
and about the problem it is faced with, then 
we no longer need a programmer to acquire this 
Understanding. Let me elaborate.
Programmers are employed to bridge two 
different domains. They first half to study 
whatever application domain they are working 
on. For instance, if they are writing an airline 
ticket reservation system they will half to 
learn a lot of detailed information about 
airlines, airline tickets, flights, luggage, et 
cetera. and then know to provide features 
for unusual cases such as canceled flights. 
And then the programmer uses their 
Understanding of the problem domain to 
explain to a computer how it can Reason about 
these things... but the programmer cannot make 
the system Understand, it can only put in a 
hollow and fragile kind of Reasoning, as a 

program with many if-then cases. And any 
misunderstandings the programmer has about 
the problem domain will become "bugs" in the 
computer program. Notice the shift in 
terminology; more later.
But today, for certain classes of moderately 
complex problems, we can use a Dee ennenn to 
automatically learn for itself how to 
Understand the problem.
Which means we no longer need a programmer 
to Understand the problem.
We have delegated our Understanding to a 
machine.
And if you think about that for a minute you 
will see that that's exactly what an AI 
should be doing. It should Understand all 
kinds of things, so that we humans won't half 
to.
And there are two common situations where 
this will be a really good idea. One is when we 

have a problem we cannot Understand 
ourselves. We know a lot of those, starting 
with cellular biology.
The other common case will be when we 
Understand the problem well, but making a 
machine Understand it well enough to get the 
job done is cheaper and easier than any 
alternative. Roombas accomplish this level 
using old style AI methods, but I predict we 
will one day be flooded with similar but Dee 
ennenn based devices that Understand 
several aspects of domestic maintenance as 
well as we do.

Do machines really Understand ?
If we give a picture like this to a Dee ennenn 
trained on images it will identify the important 
objects in the image and provide the 
rectangles, called "bounding boxes" as 
approximations to where the objects are. The 
text on the right says "Woman in white dress 
standing with tennis racket two people in 

green behind her". Which is not a bad 
description of the image. It could be used as 
the basis for a test for English skill level 
for adult education placement.
For all practical purposes, this is 
Understanding.
We had no idea how to make our computers do 
this before 2012. This is a really big deal. This 
feat requires not only a new algorithm, it 
requires a new computational paradigm.
An image is, to a computer, a single long 
sequence of numbers denoting values for red, 
blue, and green colors in values from 0 to 
255; it also knows how wide the image is. How 
does it get from this very low level 
representation to knowing that there is a 
woman with a tennis racket in the image?
This is what William Calvin has called "A river 
that flows uphill". There are very few 
mechanisms that can go in this direction, from 

low levels to
high levels. Calvin used the term to describe 
Evolution, and I can use this quote to describe 
Understanding.
I like to think of Evolution as "Nature's 
Understanding" because the phenomena are 
very similar at several levels. Evolution of 
species can bring forth advanced species 
starting from simpler species in the same 
manner that Understanding is the discovery 
and re-use of high level concepts in low level 
input.
In contrast, Reasoning proceeds by breaking 
problems into subproblems and solving those, 
which is a "flowing downhill" kind of strategy. 
In mathematics we accept (and many 
mathematicians only accept this reluctantly) 
that we need to use induction to move 
"uphill" in abstractions. And that's a very 
limited uphill movement at that. Epistemology 
allows for much stronger uphill moves. This is 

known as "jumping to conclusions on scant 
evidence" and it's allowed in Epistemology 
based pre-scientific systems.
As an aside, here's a pretty deep related 
thought: In nature, Evolution re-uses 
anything that works. I like to think that 
Understanding is a spandrel of Evolution 
itself. Neural Darwinism certainly straddles 
this gap. Could be coincidence, or the only 
answer that will work at all. More later.
We Doubled Our AI Toolkit in 2012.
We can now use these Deep Neural Networks 
as components in our systems to provide 
Understanding of certain things like vision, 
speech, and other problems that require that 
we discover high level concepts in low level 
data. The technical (Epistemology level) name 
for this uphill flowing process is "Reduction" 
and we'll be using that term later after we 
explain what it means.

Let's look at what the industry is doing with 
their newfound toys.
This is my view of what I think Tesla is doing 
(based on public sources) in their self-driving 
("Autopilot") cars. Cameras feed Vision 
Understanding components based on Deep 
Learning, and Radar feeds to Radar 
Understanding components. These supply 

bounding boxes in 2D or 3D with additional 
information like "There's a woman with a 
tennis racket ahead" to a Traffic Reasoning 
Component that uses regular programming or 
some old style AI like a rule-based system to 
actually control the car based on the vision 
and radar inputs, and the driver's desires.

But this is not the only possible configuration. 
George Hotz at Comma.ai, a team at nVidia 
corporation, and the DeepTesla class at MIT 
are using a
simpler architecture with just a neural 
network that implements lane following and 
other simple driving behaviors directly in one 
single Deep Neural Network. There is room for 
improvement, but they are a big step in the 
direction we want to move in.

Future automotive systems will likely 
integrate everything about driving into one 
single neural network, or something that 
effectively behaves as one. Vision, traffic, 
the car itself including various functionality 
like windscreen wipers, lights, and 
entertainment, how to drive in a safe and 
polite manner, and to understand also the 
driver's (or "car owner's") desires. And if 

we've gotten that far, then it is a given that 
we will have speech input and output so that 
the driver can have a conversation with the 
car while driving, and can chastise it in case it 
does something wrong.
We are nowhere close to this today. But after 
a Dee ennenn breakthrough or two, who knows 
how quickly these kinds of systems become 
available. We can already see an increasing 
stream of new features built using 
Understanding components.

This article (and the next) are expansions of a 
talk given on June 10th 2017 at the San 
Francisco Bill conference.
A decade ago I created artificial intuition 
 
 dot 
 
 
com. I now have a lot more to say, but I need to 
split this meme-package into digestible chunks; 
this takes a lot of effort to get right. If you 

liked this article and would like to see more 
like it then you can support my writing and my 
research in many ways, small to large:
Like and share these ideas with someone 
who might want to invest in Sintea-ents Inc. 
or might be otherwise interested in my 
research on a novel Language 
Understanding technology called Organic 
Learning. More on that later.
I do not receive external funding from any 
investors for this research. You can 
support my research and writing directly at 
the donation section at artificial-intuition 
dot 
 
 com
  .  
Chapter Two.
Our Greatest Invention:
Model-based Problem Solving.

The first chapter "Why AI Works" provided 
the big picture of AI and Understanding 
Machines. Next we will focus on how to 
actually implement Understanding in a 
computer. But before we can attack that core 
issue we need to simplify the journey a bit by 
defining four important words and concepts. 
I'll define one in this section, two in the 
next, and the concept of Reduction after 
that. We can then discuss the Epistemology-
level algorithm for Understanding itself.
If you are already familiar with these 
concepts, just check the headings and 
definitions that follow, in order to ensure we 
are using these words roughly the way you use 
them.
You may have noticed I write certain 
(sometimes common) words, such as Model, with 
an uppercase first letter. This means I am 
using the word in a technical, well-defined, 
unchanging sense. I will define all such 

technical terms over time and I will try not to 
use these terms until I have defined them. 
We defined 11 such terms in the first chapter, 
starting with Understanding and Reasoning. A 
dictionary of defined terms is in the works.
Models are simplifications of reality
In Epistemology and science, "Models" are 
simplifications of reality. Our rich mundane 
reality is too complex to lend itself directly 
to computation. In old TV science fiction shows, 
we would sometimes hear "... and then we fed 
all the information into the computer and this 
is what came out". Well, not anymore; 
audiences now know that's not how (regular) 
computers work.
Consider an automobile. It consist of thousands 
of parts, each with properties like materials, 
size, color, function, and sometimes complex 
interactions with other parts. What's "all 
the information" here? We can't just feed 
all of those properties and measurements and 

facts into a computer and expect to get "an 
answer". We need to ask a question. And we 
also need to simplify the problem so that we 
can feed in just the facts or numbers that 
matter, so that our question can be answered 
with minimum effort. How do we do that?
We must identify or create, first in our minds, 
a very simple Model of some sort of a generic 
automobile, and use that Model for our 
computation. After we get the answer for the 
pure and simple Model case, we apply the 
answer, with some care, back to our complex 
reality where the real automobile (and the 
problem) exists.
What kind of Model we choose depends on our 
goals. As an example of a Model, Newton's 
second law states that force equals mass times 
acceleration: F = MA. This equation is a 
classical scientific Model. If we measure mass 
and acceleration of a car then we can estimate 
how many horsepower the engine has. To use 

this equation, we engineers would model (in 
our minds) the car as a single small "point 
mass" with all the mass of the car in that 
point. Because if we don't, then we'd half to 
worry about the car rotating and other 
problems.
This is how Model based science works. One or 
more scientists somehow derive a Model for 
some phenomenon. The Model is published as an 
equation, a formula, or a computer program. 
Scientists and engineers anywhere can now use 
this equation/program/Model, treating it as a 
quick shortcut that works every time, as long 
as they have correct input data and are 
competently applying the formula to a suitable 
problem in their reality.
Our Greatest Invention.
Model Based Problem Solving (aka 
Reductionism) is the greatest invention our 
species has ever made. The general strategy 
of simplifying problems before solving them 

must be tens of thousands of years old. In 
some sense, it is a prerequisite for all other 
inventions, including the use of fire. If you 
see a forest fire then you need to first 
imagine the utility of fire, as a Model, before 
you can figure out that it might be useful to 
carry home a burning branch.
We don't think of this problem solving 
strategy as an invention because it is already 
ubiquitous in our lives. We are all taught how 
to use Model based problem solving in school 
when we start solving story problems in math 
class. But most people never learn the names 
of these strategies and are missing the big 
Epistemology level picture; this rarely 
matters... until you start working with AI, 
where lack of an Epistemological grounding may 
lead you astray into failing strategies. These 
little pillss are an attempt to remedy that.
Naïve Model based methods were examined and 
refined into scientific methods over the past 

450 years. Science is now a collection of 
thousands of Models that taken together 
allow science-competent people to solve 
problems quickly and efficiently without 
having to re-do all the work that scientists 
(like Newton) put into creating these Models in 
the first place. And the sum total of those 
Models covers many problems we want to solve 
scientifically, such as how to build a bridge, or 
travel to the moon. This reuse is what makes 
science so effective.
But not all sciences can benefit equally from 
this Model making; it works well for physics, 
chemistry, and most of biochemistry. As I'm 
fond of saying, "Physics is for simple 
problems". But as you get to more and more 
complex sciences — as you get further away 
from physics and closer to life — it gets 
harder to make decent Models. The Models 
used by for instance psychology, ecology, 
physiology, and medicine are generally more 

complex but also less powerful than Models in 
physics. Given some solid data, a physicist can 
compute the mass of the proton to six decimal 
places but we would have a harder time 
predicting the number of muskrats in New 
England next summer because that outcome 
depends on millions of parameters. The life 
sciences base many of their Models on 
statistics. Statistical Models are among the 
weakest Models used in science. We use 
statistical Models when more powerful Models 
with better predictive capabilities cannot be 
used for complexity reasons.
Models are:
hypotheses (unverified Models).
scientific theories (Models verified by 
peer review).
equations.
formulas.

complex scientific Models (simulations of 
climate, weather, et cetera.).
naïve models (that we create to simplify 
our own lives).
computer programs.
And what is Mathematics? It is a system that 
allows us to manipulate our Models to cover 
more cases. Mathematics is the purest, most 
context free of all scientific disciplines. As 
such, its greatest value to humanity is in its 
role as a help discipline to all other 
disciplines. Einstein's famous E=mc squared 
Model was derived using mathematical 
manipulation of other Models known to 
Einstein at the time. But perhaps mathematics 
isn't as much a scientific discipline as an 
Epistemological one; I may explore this aside 
later.

Model use requires Understanding.
A good Model is context free, since that 
maximizes the number of contexts it can be 
applied in. Newton's second law , F = MA , 
works pretty much everywhere we have 
forces, masses, and accelerations. The trade-
off for this flexibility is that we ourselves 
need to Understand the problem domain. In 
rocket science, when maneuvering in space,  F 
= MA  will often work perfectly, but when 
you are applying it to the acceleration of your 
car you need to account for lots of effects 
like friction between the road and the 
wheels, wind resistance, and the like. So , F = 
MA , applied naïvely would give you the wrong 
answer if friction is involved. This 
demonstrates the main disadvantage with 
Models. They require that both the Model 
Maker (scientists like Newton) and the Model 
users (STEM competent people everywhere) 
Understand enough about the problem domain 

to know whether the Model is applicable or 
not, and how to use it. This Understanding is 
the expensive part of science, since using 
science requires first getting a solid science 
education in order to avoid mistakes when using 
Models.
And since Models require Understanding, they 
cannot be used to create Understanding. This 
is a major problem for AI implementers.
Chapter 3.
Two Dirty Words.
Reductionism is the use of Models. holelism is 
the avoidance of Models. Models are scientific 
Models, Theories, Hypotheses, Formulas, 
Equations, Superstitions (!) and most computer 
programs. 
Reductionism and holelism.
After having sorted out what Models are, we 
can now discuss two complementary problem 
solving strategies (or perhaps meta-

strategies). They are in many ways each 
other's opposites, but the classification can 
become an argument about meta-levels and 
definitions. I will initially pretend the division 
is clear and obvious, and will elaborate later.
Reductionism is the Use of Models.
In this series we will use exactly the above 
definition of the word "Reductionism". If you 
look up the definition elsewhere you may find 
that some sources divide the strategy into 
sub-strategies. They also seem to miss the 
most important sub-strategy, which we'll 
discuss later. But what all these sub-
strategies have in common is that they all 
provide ways to simplify observations of 
fragments of our rich mundane reality into 
much simpler Models, which we use for 
reasoning, computation, and sharing.
Reductionism is so central to how we do 
science — the heavy reliance on Models, such 
as theories, equations and formulas, in physics, 

chemistry, et cetera. — that we can speak of 
"Model Based sciences" or "Reductionist 
sciences" where such Model Making is easy and 
effective. And this classification excludes 
those sciences, like psychology, where such 
Model making is difficult and less often 
rewarded with reliable results.
After considering all the advantages of 
Models we might wonder why we even bother 

discussing it. To many people, especially those 
with a solid STEM (Science, Technology, 
Engineering, and Mathematics) education, it may 
well look like the only choice. But there is 
also the other strategy:
holelism is the Avoidance of Models.
This is where the questions start. This is 
where the paradoxes surface. This is where 
your worldview may get shaken up. Seriously. 
Especially if you are a scientist or engineer 
with a solid STEM education and decades of 
professional success using science and Models.

In some sense, the goal of this entire series is 
to demonstrate that we need to use both 
problem solving strategies when creating our 
artificial Intelligences. Because that is what 
it is going to take. We need Holistic 
Understanding; we established that in the 
first chapter. As a sample of the new ideas 
that we will half to deal with I will just 
mention:

Reasoning is Reductionist.
Understanding is Holistic.
Neural Networks are Holistic.
Holistic systems can jump to conclusions on 
scant evidence.
Holistic systems can themselves know 
what is important and what isn't.
Holistic systems can solve problems we 
ourselves cannot (or don't care to) 
Understand.
Holistic systems are "Model Free". They 
do not use any a priori Models of any 
problem domain.
Reasoning systems inherit all problems 
and benefits of Reductionism.
Understanding systems inherit all 
problems and benefits of holelism.
Humans are born Holistic.
Humans each solve thousands of little 
problems every day, and we are solving 

almost all these problems Holistically, 
using Understanding, and without a need to 
Reason at all. This includes fluent 
language use.
A STEM education instills a strict 
Reductionist discipline in order to mitigate 
problems with fallibility of Holistic human 
minds.
All intelligences are fallible.
These claims all deserve individual 
treatments, and we'll get to all of them in 
later sections. But the major theme is clear:
Humans are mainly Holistic problem solvers. 
The same must be true for our Artificial 
Intelligences.
We had several reasons for focusing on 
Reductionist Methods (Models) and Reasoning 
during the first 60 years of AI. Our computers 
were too small to make Neural Networks work 
at all. But there were also ideological 

reasons. AI was born out of the math and 
computer science departments of our 
universities. And therefore most of the 
people working on AI were solidly oriented 
towards the goal of creating a logic based 
Reductionist infallible artificial mind. To build 
early AIs, like expert systems, we entered 
rules or programmed in lots of facts to Reason 
about. But this was building Reductionist 
castles in the air, comprised of un-anchored 
facts that didn't tie to any Understanding 
whatsoever. The troubles with classical AI, 
such as brittleness (the tendency to make 
spectacular and expensive mistakes at the 
edges of their competence), can be directly 
traced to the lack of foundational 
Understanding to support these attempts at 
Reasoning.
Understanding Machines will not suffer from 
this brittleness, but will fail gracefully at 
the edges of their competence, much like 

humans. Most of the time they will "know" 
the answer; beyond that they will guess. And 
the guesses they make are based on a lifetime 
of experience (gained through learning from a 
large corpus) and so they have a good chance 
of being at least a workable choice, if not 
perfect.
How can anyone solve problems without 
using Models?
A lot of people coming from a STEM background 
cannot even imagine how to solve problems 
without using Models. But it's not hard, once 
you understand the difference. Mostly it's a 
matter of doing what worked last time. The 
problem is now figuring out whether we are in 
a situation that's similar enough that it will 
work again. This is mostly a pattern matching 
problem. More later.
What's the result? The Holistic answer is a 
quick guess at the best action, based on 
experience with similar situations. Most of the 

time it's correct, sometimes it's a little 
wrong, and every now and then, there's a 
noticeable mistake. And if we get things a 
little wrong, we may notice the outcome and 
correct the action. We learn from our 
mistakes. If we practice something a lot we will 
start doing it effectively and perfectly 
every time. Do we learn faster if we make 
more mistakes? Should we make mistakes on 
purpose? More later.
In situations where you cannot use Models, 
which are more common than many realize, the 
Holistic guess may also be your only option. 
Conversely, if you have an adequately well-
working Model-based solution, just use that.
My video "Model Free Methods Workshop" 
demonstrates how the group solves four 
different problems, at a high level, using 
both Reductionist and Holistic Methods.
Why are these "Dirty words"?
Well, they are not dirty to Epistemologists.

Reductionism has been the default problem 
solving paradigm because it's the one that has 
to be taught. We are born with a holistic 
problem solving apparatus. But Reductionist 
science doesn't come naturally; therefore it 
has to be taught in schools, practiced, and 
carried out according to certain rules. Perhaps 
that's why the sciences are called 
"disciplines", because following the ideal 
scientific method requires practice and 
constant vigilance.
J. C. Smuts' book "holelism and Evolution" 
(1926) established the terminology in the 
Epistemological literature. And Erwin 
Schrödinger wrote "What is Life" (1944), 
questioning the power of physics to provide 
useful explanations to the life sciences. Pirsig 
wrote "Zen and the Art of Motorcycle 
Maintenance" (1974) that contrasts something 
very Holistic, Zen Buddhism, with something 
very Reductionist, Motorcycle Maintenance. So 

the chasm between the strategies was 
identified a long time ago.
The strategies are each other's opposites. 
holelism-based strategies for Understanding 
can handle many important kinds of complexity 
and can quickly provide a guessed answer, but 
these guesses are fallible, and often more 
expensive to compute. Reductionist education 
and strategies brought benefits of cheap 
Model reuse and formal rigor to improve 
correctness, but cannot handle complexity and 
is therefore dependent on an external 
Understander to determine applicability in 
real-world complexity-rich situations. And as 
part of that education, we are told that 
Holistic methods (such as jumping to conclusions 
on scant evidence) are bad... in spite of the 
fact that our brains use Holistic methods 
thousands of times each day to successfully 
Understand the environment we live in.

We can all use either strategy as appropriate; 
if we don't have a STEM education we will 
still sometimes make naïve Models. But 
sometimes there is a choice and different 
people may prefer one or the other. When 
playing pool, some people estimate and compute 
bouncing angles and some people shoot "by 
feel".
But we have our preferences, and it might be 
tempting to label a person with an overly 
strong preference as "a Holist" or "a 
Reductionist". This is sometimes received 
badly, if perceived as a limitation. Some 
dictionaries even flag "Reductionist" as 
derogatory; and yet, some people use it as a 
self-assigned label. I try to use these terms 
only as shorthand for "a person with a stated 
strong preference for Holistic (or 
Reductionist) Methods".
The two terms were very useful in 
Epistemology. But then someone invented the 

concept of "Holistic Medicine": Instead of just 
treating a single medical problem, you analyzed 
the patient's entire situation, attempting to 
account for diet, exercise, sleep, work, 
habits, stress levels, allergies, family, 
friends, and environmental poisons. A good 
idea, in general. But the wide scope was 
unmanageable by the (traditionally 
Reductionist) medical establishment and the 
idea faded away. Instead, the whole idea of 
holelism became tainted as woo-woo when the 
term, "Holistic Medicine", became associated 
with woo-woo merchants selling crystals and 
aromatherapy.
As explained above, "holelism is the avoidance 
of Models", or better phrased, "holelism is 
the meta-strategy of avoiding a priori Models 
of the problem domain". That extra precision 
rarely matters. There's nothing woo-woo 
about it. It does say "science not required", 
but...

You can make breakfast without Reasoning
It is important to note that Holistic methods 
are based on a lifetime of experience (in 
humans) and a training corpus' worth of 
experience (in Neural Networks). When you are 
making breakfast, you are relying on this 
experience, mostly repeating whatever worked 
yesterday.
Some people claim they use Reasoning while 
making breakfast... but they can make their 
breakfast while speaking to someone else on 
the phone and as they hang up, they find 
themselves suddenly sitting at the breakfast 
table with their coffee and hot oatmeal. Same 
thing when driving to work; you may get lost in 
thought, and then you find yourself parked 
at work. You didn't need to Reason, since all 
subproblems that occur in driving had been 
solved multiple times during years of driving. 
Subconscious Understanding is used for simple 
things like sequencing our leg muscles as we 

walk; you have no idea how you are doing that, 
it just works. Same thing with vision. You 
Understand that you are looking at a chair, 
but you do not have conscious access to the 
fifteenth rod/cone/pixel to the left of your 
center of vision, and have no idea how this 
Understanding works. Same thing with 
understanding and generating language. You do 
not have any explanation for how you are able 
to understand the meaning of this sentence. 
Understanding is Subconscious and Holistic.
So for the majority of things we do every day, 
we do not need Reasoning or Reductionist 
Methods. Some people would like to think they 
are "logical thinkers", immune to 
most cognitive fallacies, but whether they are 
or not, at the lower levels, everyone is 
solving most of their problems Holistically.
I claimed that "Reductionist Reasoning 
requires Holistic Understanding". In other 
words, I need to Understand the problem 

domain at hand before I can create and/or re-
use Models to enable me to Reason about the 
domain.
So Holistic Understanding is much more 
important than Reductionist Reasoning because 
it is the most used strategy, by far, and the 
former is also a prerequisite for the latter. 
But the fallibility of Holistic Understanding 
forced us to create Reductionist science and 
to teach it in STEM educations. It is as if the 
purpose of science is to keep Holistic guessing 
in check. But this aversion to fallibility has a 
cost, because it means complexity-bound and 
"irreducible" problems cannot be solved. Like 
language Understanding, global resource 
allocation, and social interactions.
Reductionism and Model based science appeared 
around 1650 after a century of gestation. 
Excluding minor romantic interludes, it has 
held its position as the dominant paradigm for 
about 400 years. This is changing.

The Reductionist train is running out of track.
The remaining hard problems facing humanity 
are problems of irreducible complexity in 
domains where Reductionist Model Based 
Methods simply cannot work. Whether we like 
the idea or not, we need to accept these 
Holistic methods into our AI toolkits, starting 
now. We will use these methods either in 
their raw form, as Model Free Methods, or as 
Understanding Machines at any level from 
component to robot co-worker.
Chapter 4.
Reduction.
Epistemic Reduction is a process that discovers 
higher level abstractions in lower level data 
by discarding everything at the lower layer 
that it recognizes as irrelevant 
We have seen the power of Models. We have 
introduced the two problem solving meta-

strategies of Reductionism and holelism. We 
also noted that the
creation and use of Models requires an 
Intelligent agent that Understands the 
problem domain — someone or something has to 
perform the Reduction. I will now discuss 
Reduction in some detail.
Until 2012, only humans and other animals with 
brains could perform Reduction. Now our Deep 
Neural Networks (Dee ennenn) can perform 
limited Reduction. How do brains and Dee enn 
endz accomplish this, and how can we improve 
these algorithms?
This may be, to some readers, the most 
rewarding part of this series, because it 
provides you the opportunity to learn a new 
and useful skill. Most people never think 
about the world at this level. Knowledge of 
Reduction provides a new point of view that 
you can use to better understand your 

environment, other intelligent agents around 
you, and modern AI systems.
Definition of Reduction.
Reduction is a process that discovers higher 
level abstractions in lower level data
We will initially note that Reduction is exactly 
the same as Abstraction. Why do we need a new 
word? Because the term "Abstraction" is 
mostly used by scientists already operating in a 
pure Modelspace, seeking a higher level of 
abstraction in that space. But to them, 
"Abstraction" is something that just magically 
happens in their heads, since there are no 
scientific theories for how Abstraction works. 
There cannot be, since Abstraction is a concept 
in Epistemology, not Science.
AI researchers are starting from something 
much closer to our rich mundane reality, 
where there is a lot of confounding context. 
We are solving the meta-problem of how to 
move from there into a space that is 

sufficiently abstract to solve the problem at 
hand. Here, Reduction is a much more 
appropriate term. We can't abstract a red 
pixel or the letter "b", but we can Reduce a 
rich context containing that pixel or letter 
into a higher level concept.
We Are Swimming In Reduction.
Paradoxically, one of the hardest things about 
teaching Reduction is that we don't see the 
need to learn about it because we all do it all 
the time, every millisecond, and the resulting 
Reductions (Models) become available to our 
conscious minds as if "by magic". Brains Reduce 
away 99.999%  of their sensory input, but 
this process is subconscious and-hence invisible 
to us. The situation is much like (supposedly) a 
fish swimming in water. We are all masters of 
Reduction, but we don't know how we do it or 
that we even do it. We didn't know this would 
ever matter. And generally, it doesn't.

Well, it matters in Epistemology, and it 
matters in AI, since we need to actually 
implement that "magic". We as Epistemologists 
must know how Abstraction is actually 
performed. And we give the Epistemology 
level equivalent of Abstraction the name 
"Reduction" because that's the recipe for 
how to accomplish it. We Reduce our rich 
mundane Reality by discarding (reducing away) 
what's irrelevant. And by using the name 
"Reduction" we (as AI Epistemologists) keep 
reminding ourselves how it is properly done.
Consider the following descriptions of a car. 
The slide is meant to be read from the bottom 
up, to match "abstraction levels" from low to 
high.

If I'm driving to work, I better be 
driving my car. If the police are looking for a 
stolen car they would be looking for a Red 
2010 Toyota Celica. If I'm buying a new car, 
then I might be looking for just a new Toyota 
Celica. And a self-driving car would likely 
only need to Understand whether an obstacle 
is a vehicle or not, in order to Model maximum 
speed for future movement.

We see that we want to pick the appropriate 
level of abstraction to deal with the same 
object (or topic) in different situations. But 
more importantly, we see that we can get from 
a more detailed description (at the bottom) to 
a more generic one (higher up) by simply 
discarding some detail.
I hasten to point out that Reduction is more 
complicated than this simple example of 
decreasing specificity shows, but we need to 
start somewhere and this image allows us to 
form intuitions that will serve for a while. 
True Reduction involves operations like 
shifting from syntax to semantics or from 
instance to type; the appearance of "car" as 
an abstraction of "Toyota", and the step from 
"My Toyota" to "A Toyota" illustrates these 
steps. Algorithms for these things are known.
Salience.
Part of the trick is to know what to discard. 
At each level of abstraction, something can 

typically be identified as the least important 
property. "Red" and "Celica" are more 
significant than "2010" for anyone looking for 
a car. If we had started from "My red 2010 
Toyota truck", then the word "truck" would 
not be discarded until the top level. 
Reduction requires Understanding what's 
relevant; in Reduction we "keep that which is 
Salient". More later.
Partial Reductions.
Most of the time we do NOT perform Reduction 
all the way to Models. I cannot stress this 
enough. We discuss Reduction to Models for 
pedagogical reasons; it is easy to initially see 
the context-free Model as the goal of 
Reduction. In reality, in brains, we can stop 
Reducing the moment we recognize that we 
have a working answer or response, such as a 
command to contract some muscle or having 
Understood the meaning of a sentence 
subconsciously. At this point, there is still 

some residual context but we use that context 
productively rather than discard it to move to 
higher levels.
Some people claim we use Models for all our 
thinking, but I'm using capital M "Model" only 
to describe a completely context free 
Abstraction. F = MA is an example of that. 
There is no need to check whether a car is a 
Red car or a Toyota, the equation works not 
only for all cars but for all forces, masses 
and accelerations. We might come up with a 
special equation for acceleration of Tesla 
cars, which would require different inputs 
like battery charge level and software 
settings; that would not be a context free 
Model since it would not work on a Toyota. For 
almost all tasks — basically, in everything 
except Science, and even there, only rarely 
— we only perform as much Reduction as is 
necessary to get the job done. When learning 
to ski, you only figure out how you yourself 

need to perform given your body and 
equipment; we do not need to parameterize our 
skiing skills for someone with twice the body 
mass, because that would be useless to us for 
the purpose of our own skiing. But a scientist 
would half to go that far, in order to 
parameterize away one more piece of context 
from the Model they are creating. For 
instance, when creating a skiing video game or 
designing a new ski.
If we consider the enormous amount of 
subconscious activity that happens in the brain 
we can safely say that partial Reductions are 
the most common Reductions. For instance, 
when we take a step forward, our subconscious 
has analyzed our posture and velocity by using 
Reduction based on low level nerve signals 
and is commanding leg muscles to contract in a 
precisely timed sequence. This activity is 
something we are unaware of; most of us 
don't even know what leg muscles we have. 

And there would be no time to perform 
Reduction all the way to Models. That process 
takes a minimum of a half second and you 
don't have that kind of time available to 
respond to an imbalance when walking or skiing.
Reduction in Society.
Most of us get paid to Understand whatever 
we need to Understand in order to perform 
our jobs. In other words, most of us get paid to 
do Reduction. If you are approving building 
permits, you Reduce a stack of forms to a one-
bit verdict of "Approved" or "Rejected". We 
excel at Reduction, and this is the main reason 
most of us haven't been replaced by robots. 
But we see that when future Understanding 
Machines can perform Reduction by 
themselves, then we are unlikely to get paid 
for it.

Levels of Reduction.
Suppose a young man and a young woman fall in 
love, something happens to mess it all up, and 
then they sort this out and re-unite.
This is what happened in the man's "rich 
mundane reality". Suppose the man wants to 
share this experience, because there was some 
moral to the story that he thinks would be 
interesting to others and possibly important.
He could analyze what happened and figure 
out which were the key events in the saga and 
then have actors on a stage re-enact the 
story as a play. This is a Reduction because the 
boring parts of the story would not be part of 
the play. They are discarded as irrelevant. 
But the story would be acted out by real 
people in front of a live audience. If you are 
in the audience, you can move your head to see 
behind any actor on the stage and you can 
clearly see everything on the stage, not just 
one actor speaking at a time.

He could make a movie about it. Now your point 
of view is predefined by the camera angle and 
cropping. You can no longer see behind an 
actor, and you can often only see those actors 
that are involved in the main action.
He could write a book about it. We no longer 
can see even the people described in the book, 
except in our imagination.
A critic reviewing the theatre play may 
Reduce it to "Boy meets girl, boy loses girl, 
boy gets girl"
A drama school graduate may summarize it as "A 
double-reversal plot". This is a description 
that is so free from context (doesn't even 
specify boys or girls) that it could be argued it 
qualifies to be called "A Model".
Plays, Movies, Books, Stories, Tropes, et 
cetera are all Partial Reductions of Reality, 
and some are more Reduced than others. Just 
like in the "Red Toyota" case, we need to 

find the appropriate level of Abstraction to 
work with.
The young man in the example, when writing a 
book or a screenplay, has much in common with a 
Scientist trying to describe something in nature 
in a re-usable context free manner by 
Reducing it to a Model. They are Model 
Makers, or are at least performing partial 
Reduction. They are discarding the irrelevant 
bits.
The Opposite of Reduction.
We also need to be able to move in the opposite 
direction, from Models to Reality. Or at least 
from more abstract Partial Models to Partial 
Models closer to reality.
When an actor is given a screenplay they know 
it only contains rough directions for what to 
do and what lines to say. The actor's job is to 
"give a little of themselves" to flesh out 
the screenplay to actual actions, including 
creating — synthesizing — the appropriate 

display of emotions, tone of voice, and body 
language. They use their experience as people 
and as actors ; they use elements of their 
past lives and skills they have acquired by 
training to create something people in the 
audience might relate to. For example, they 
may re-purpose a personal experience ("be as 
sad as when my hamster died"), things they 
learned in drama school (such as speaking, 
singing, dancing, and sword-play), from other 
actors ("What would Bogart do"), from 
fiction, from other movies and plays, et 
cetera.
The actor's art is to convey whatever the 
script intends to convey — emotions, a 
morality cookie, a political position, titillation, 
surprise, and so on— starting from a simple 
Model (the screenplay). Their job is similar to 
an engineer's when they are faced with a 
problem and use a Model to solve it. The 
engineer would use their experience to decide 

that "m" is the mass of the car and not the 
tire pressure. The actor decides that 
"sadness" is more appropriate than "grief" 
for a certain scene, et cetera.
I call this process, which is "the opposite of 
Reduction", by the name it is used in problem 
solving: "Application". We use a Model to 
simplify a problem situation, moving it into an 
abstract and purer "Modelspace". We solve 
the problem there (by performing math, 
perhaps) and then "Apply" the answer to our 
rich reality, to the problem we are trying to 
solve.
Many of you may recognize the word 
"Application" or its abbreviation "App". 
That's not as farfetched as it might seem; 
apps are software-based Models.
Reduction and Application in Brains.
Back to the issue of Partial Reductions. 
Consider the actor reading a screenplay. They 

are using their eyes to gather "pixels" of 
color and orientation. The brain then 
performs pattern matching — Reduction — 
from these low level signals to letters, 
words, to language, to higher level concepts 
like love and separation, and eventually to a 
high level Understanding of the playwright's 
intents. The actor then takes this high level 
Understanding and by performing Application, 
they add their own Experience to the script, 
to get closer to reality in their performance.
Our brains are capable of moving up and down 
many levels of abstraction at once. Perhaps it 
tracks all of them simultaneously, keeping 
layers of abstraction separate. This is a clue 
for why Deep Neural Networks perform 
better than shallow ones. Which is what we'll 
discuss next.

Chapter 5.
 Why Deep Learning Works.
Deep Learning Performs Epistemic Reduction .
A math-free computer-science-free 
description of why Deep Learning works.
We have now built a base of theory for
Why AI Works, what Models are and how to 
create them, what Reductionism and holelism 
are, and what the process of Reduction is. 
These are the fundamentals of AI 
Epistemology. This base allows us to discuss 
various strategies to move towards 
Understanding Machines in a well understood 
and controlled manner.
We are now ready to discuss why Deep Learning 
(DL) works. This is the fifth and last entry in 
the AI Epistemology Primer.

Deep Learning Performs Reduction
This is an unsurprising claim, considering the 
preceding chapters. There are several 
mutually compatible theories for "how" Deep 
Learning works. But just as in the first 
chapter, we will now discuss the 
Epistemological aspects, "why" it works, from 
several viewpoints and levels, starting from 
the bottom. We will use examples from the 
TensorFlow system and API (as a library) as a 
stand-in for all Deep Learning-family 
algorithms and TF programs, because the 
available API functions heavily shape and 
constrain solutions that can be implemented in 
this space and the generalization should be 
straightforward enough.
Consider the following illustration of image 
Understanding using Karis (an excellent 
abstraction layer on top of TensorFlow):

I like to refer to the input layer as being "on 
the bottom" rather than at the far left as in 
this image. When viewing it my way, the low-
to-high dimension we use in my rotated version 
of the image can be mentally mapped to a low-
to-high stack of abstraction levels; I'm not 
the only one using this dimension this way. I 
hope this rotation isn't too confusing.
We can see that there is an obvious data 
Reduction and an obvious complexity Reduction. 
Can we determine whether the system is also 
performing what I'd like to call "Epistemic 

Reduction": Is it reducing away that which is 
unimportant, and if so, how does it accomplish 
this? How does an operator in a Deep Learning 
stack know what makes something important 
(Salient)?
A pure data "reduction" of sorts could be 
accomplished by compression schemes or even 
random deletion. This is undesirable. We need 
to discard the non-salient parts so that in the 
end, we are left with what is salient. Some 
people have not understood the importance of 
Salience based Reduction and use lossless 
compression power of reversible algorithms as 
a measurement of intelligence. Which is no 
more useful than believing a simple video 
camera can understand what it sees.
So let me conjure up, a bit like in the movie 
"Inside Out", a fairy tale of what goes on in a 
Deep Learning network, except we'll do it 
"Bottom Up". Suppose we have built a system 
for finding faces in an image, with the intent 

of incorporating that as a feature in a camera; 
many cameras have this feature already, so 
this is not a far-fetched example. We 
implement an image understanding neural 
network, show the system many kinds of images 
for a few days, perhaps using so-called 
supervised learning in order to improve this 
story, and then we show it an image of a family 
having a picnic in a park and ask the system to 
outline where the faces are so that the 
camera can focus sharply on them.
The input image is converted from RGB color 
values to an input array and the data in this 
array is then shuffled through many layers 
of operators. And for many of these layers, 
there are fewer outputs than there are 
inputs, as you can see above. Which means some 
things half to be discarded by the processing. 
Each layer receives initially signals "from 
below", that is, from the input, or from lower 
levels of abstraction, and produces some 

reduced output to send to the next layer 
operator above.
To continue the tale, at some early level, 
some operator is given a few adjacent pixels 
and determines that there is a vertical, 
slightly curved line dividing a darker green 
area from a lighter green area, so it "tells" 
the operator "above" this simpler line- or 
color-based description using some encoding we 
don't really care about.
The operator at the level above might have 
gotten another matching curve and says 
"these match what I saw a lot of when the 
label "blade of grass" was given as a ground 
truth label during (supervised) learning. If no 
label is known, then we again assume some 
other uninteresting representation. It is OK to 
propagate results without human-labeled 
signals because whatever signaling scheme is 
used will be learned by the level above.

The operator above that says "when I get lots 
of blades-of-grass signals I reduce all of 
that to a "lawn" signal as I send it upward.
And eventually we reach the higher operator 
layers and someone there says "We are a face 
finder application. We are completely 
uninterested in lawns" and discards the lawn 
as non-salient.
What remains after you discard all non-faces 
are the faces.
You cannot discard anything until you know 
what it is, or can at least estimate whether 
it's worth learning. Specifically, until you 
understand it at the level of abstraction you 
are operating at. The low level blade-of-
grass recognizers could not discard the grass 
because they had no clue about the high level 
saliencies of lawn-or-not and face-or-not 
that the higher layers specialize in.

You can only tell what's Salient or not 
(important or not) at the level of 
Understanding and Abstraction you are 
operating at. Each layer receives "lower 
level descriptions" from below, discards what 
it recognizes as irrelevant, and sends its own 
version of "higher level descriptions" upward 
until we reach someone who knows what we are 
really looking for.
This is of course why Deep Learning is deep.
This idea itself is not new. It was discussed by 
Oliver Selfridge in 1959; he described an idea 
called "Pandemonium" which was largely 
ignored by the AI community because of its 
radical departure from the logic based AI 
promoted by people like John McCarthy and 
Marvin Minsky. But Pandemonium presaged, by 
almost 60 years, the layer-by layer 
architecture with signals passing up and down 
that is used today in all Deep Neural 

Networks. This is the reason my online handle 
is @pandemonica.
So do any TensorFlow operators support this 
Reduction?
Let's start by examining the Pooling operators; 
there are a few in the diagram. They are 
conceptually simple. There are over 50 pooling 
operators in TensorFlow. There is an operator 
named "2x2 Max-Pool Operator". In the 
diagram, it is used four times:
It is given four inputs with varying values and 
propagates the highest value of those as its 
only output. Close to the input layer these 

four values may be four adjacent pixels 
where their values might be a brightness in 
some color channel, but higher up they mean 
whatever they mean. In effect, the Max-Pool 
2x2 discards the "least important" 75% of its 
input data, preserving and propagating only one 
(highest) value.
In the case of pixels, it might mean the 
brightest color value. In the case of blades of 
grass, it might mean "there is at least one 
blade of grass here". The interpretation of 
what is discarded depends on the layer, 
because in a very real sense, layers 
represent levels of Reduction; Abstraction 
levels, if you prefer that term.
And we should now be clearly seeing one of 
the most important ideas in Deep Neural 
Networks: Reduction has to be done at 
multiple levels of abstraction. Each set of 
decisions about what is reduced away as 
irrelevant and what is kept as possibly 

relevant can only be made at an appropriate 
abstraction level. We cannot yet abstract away 
the lawn if all we know is there are dark-
and-light-green-areas levels.
This is a simplification; decisions made in this 
manner will be heeded only if they have 
contributed to positive outcomes in learning. 
Unreliable and useless decision makers will be 
ignored using any of several mechanisms that 
we may apply during learning. More later.
For now, we continue by examining the most 
popular subset of all TensorFlow operators - 
the Convolution family. From the TensorFlow 
Manual:
Note that although these ops are called 
"convolution", they are strictly speaking 
"cross-correlation".
Convolution layers discover cross-correlations 
and co-occurrences of various kinds. Co-
occurrences to known patterns in the image at 

various locations; spatial relationships within 
an image itself, like Geoff Hinton's recent 
example of the mouth normally being found 
below the nose; and more obviously, in the 
supervised learning case, correlations between 
discovered patterns and the available meta-
information (tags, labels) that correlate with 
the patterns the system may discover. This is 
what allows an an Image Understander to tag 
the occurrence of a nose in an image with the 
text string "nose". Beyond this, such systems 
may learn to Understand concepts like 
"behind" and "under".
The information that is propagated to the 
higher levels in the network now describes 
these correlations. Uncorrelated information 
is viewed as non-salient and is discarded. In 
the preceeding diagram, this discarding is done 
by a max pooling layer after the 
convolution+rayloo layers. rayloo is a kind of 
layer operator that discards negative values, 

introducing a non-linearity that is important 
for DL but not really important for our 
analysis.
This pattern of three layers — convolution, 
then rayloo, then a pooling layer — is quite 
popular because this combination is performing 
one reliable Reduction step. These three 
layer types in this "packaged" sequence may 
appear many times in a DL computational graph. 
And each of these three-layer packages is 
reducing away things that levels below had no 
chance of evaluating for saliency because they 
didn't "Understand" their input at the 
correct level.
Again,
This is why Deep Learning is deep... Because 
you can only do Reduction by discarding the 
irrelevant if you Understand. what is 
relevant and irrelevant at each different 
level of Abstraction.

Is Deep Learning Science or not?
While the Deep Learning process can be 
described using mathematical notation, mostly 
using Linear Algebra, the process itself isn't 
Scientific. We can not explain how this system 
is capable of forming any kind of 
Understanding by just staring at these 
equations, since Understanding is an emergent 
effect of repeated Reductions over many 
layers.
Consider the Convolution operators. As the TF 
manual quote clearly states, Convolution 
layers discover correlations. Many blades of 
grass together typically means a lawn. In TF, a 
lot of cycles are spent on discovering these 
correlations. Once found, the correlation 
leads to some adjustment of some weight to 
make the correct Reduction more likely to be 
re-discovered the next round (because this 
Reduction is done multiple times) but in 
essence, all correlations are forgotten and 

half to be re-discovered in every pass 
through the Deep Learning loop of upward 
signaling and downward gradient descent with 
minute adjustments to erring variables. The 
system is in effect learning from its mistakes, 
which is a good sign, since that may well be the 
only way to learn anything. At least at these 
levels. This up-and-down may be repeated 
many times for each image in the learning set.
This up-and-down makes some sense for image 
Understanding. Some are using the same 
algorithms for text. Fortunately, in the text 
case, there are very efficient alternatives 
to this ridiculously expensive algorithm. For 
starters, we can represent the discovered 
correlations explicitly, using regular 
"pointers" or "object references" in our 
programming languages. Or "sighnapses" in 
brains. "This (software) neuron correlates 
with that software neuron" says a sighnapse 
or reference connecting this to that. We shall 

discuss such systems in the section on Organic 
Learning, which is coming up next.
Neither the Deep Learning family of 
algorithms, or Organic Learning, are Scientific 
in any meaningful way. They jump to 
conclusions on scant evidence and trust 
correlations without insisting on provable 
causality; this is disallowed in scientific 
theory, where absolutely reliable causality is 
the coin of the realm. F = MA or go home. 
Most Deep Neural Network programming is 
uncomfortably close to trial and error, with 
only minor clues about how to improve the 
system when reaching mediocre results. 
"Adding more layers doesn't always help". 
These kinds of problems are the everyday 
reality to most practitioners of Deep Neural 
Networks. With no a priori Models, there will 
be no a priori guarantees. The best estimate of 
the reliability and correctness of any Deep 
Neural Network, or even any Holistic system 

we can ever devise, is going to be extensive 
testing. More on this later.
Why would we ever use engineered systems 
that cannot be guaranteed to provide the 
correct answer? Because we have no choice. We 
only use Holistic methods when the reliable 
Reductionist methods are unavailable. As is 
the case when the task requires the ability to 
perform Autonomous Reduction of context-
rich slices of our rich complex reality as a 
whole. When the task requires Understanding.
Don't we have an alternative to these 
unreliable machines? Sure we do. There are 
billions of humans on the planet that are 
already masters of this complex task. Because 
they live in the rich world and need skills 
that are unavailable with Reductionist 
methods, starting with low level things like 
object permanence. So you can replace a well-
performing but theoretically unproven 
contraption - a Holistic Understanding Machine 

built out of Deep Neural Networks - with a 
well-performing human being using a deeply 
mystical kind of Understanding hidden in their 
opaque heads. Who earns much more per hour. 
This doesn't look like much of an 
improvement. The machine cannot be proven 
correct because it doesn't function like 
normal computers. It is performing Reduction, 
the skill formerly restricted to animals.
A Holistic skill.
My favorite soundbite is a mere corollary to 
the Frame Problem by McCarthy and Hayes; you 
have seen it and you will see it again, since it 
is one of the stronger results of AI 
Epistemology. But we will, in but a few years, 
agree on a definition of intelligence that 
makes autonomous Reduction a requirement. 
This once semi her etic soundbite will then be 
obvious to all. If it isn't already.
All intelligences are fallible.

Chapter Six.
Experimental Epistemology for AI.
We can now create computer-based 
experimental implementations to Epistemology-
level theories in order to test them and 
learn from the outcomes.

Experimental epistemology is the use of 
the experimental methods of the 
cognitive sciences to shed light on 
debates within epistemology, the 
philosophical study of knowledge and 
rationally justified belief. Some skeptics 
contend that 'experimental 
epistemology' (or 'experimental 
philosophy' more generally) is an 
oxymoron. If you are doing experiments, 
they say, you are not doing philosophy. 
You are doing psychology or some other 

scientific activity. It is true that the 
part of experimental philosophy that is 
devoted to carrying out experiments and 
performing statistical analyses on the 
data obtained is primarily a scientific 
rather than a philosophical activity. 
However, because the experiments are 
designed to shed light on debates within 
philosophy, the experiments themselves 
grow out of mainstream philosophical 
debate and their results are injected 
back into the debate, with an eye to 
moving the debate forward. This part of 
experimental philosophy is indeed 
philosophy—not philosophy as usual 
perhaps, but philosophy nonetheless.
Experimental Epistemology by James R. 
Beebe
Traditional Experimental Epistemology 
conducted experiments on interviews and 
psychological tests on human volunteers or 
relied on population statistics.

As one of the newer branches of Cognitive 
Science, Machine Learning has now provided us 
with a very different approach to this domain. 
We can now create computer based 
experimental implementations to Epistemology-
level theories in order to test them and 
learn from the outcomes.
In Machine Learning, the most important 
Epistemology level concepts and hypotheses 
are about Reasoning, Understanding, Learning, 
Epistemic Reduction, Abstraction, Creativity, 
Prediction, Attention, Instincts, Intuitions, 
Concepts, Saliency, Models, Reductionism, 
holelism, and other things all sharing these 
features:
      1. Science has no equations, formulas, or 
other Models for how they work. They are 
Epistemology level concepts, not Science level 
concepts.

2. Our theories about these concepts half 
to be sufficiently solid and detailed to 
allow for computer implementations.
This is because Science itself is built on top of 
Epistemology level concepts. And practitioners 
need to be aware of this or they will 
experience cognitive dissonance induced 
confusion and stress.
The Red Pill of Machine Learning confronts 
the Elephant in the Room of Machine 
Learning: Machine Learning is not Scientific.
What Can We Learn from AI Epistemology?
An excerpt from The Red Pill:
Consider the following statements from the 
domain of Epistemology, and how each of them 
can be viewed as an implementation hint for AI 
designers. We are already able to measure 
their effects on system competence.
"You can only learn that which you already 
almost know" -- Patrick Winston, MIT.

"All intelligences are fallible" -- Monickah 
Anderson.
"In order to detect that something is new you 
need to recognize everything old" -- Monickah 
Anderson.
"You cannot Reason about that which you do 
not Understand" -- Monickah Anderson.
"You are known by the company you keep" -- 
Simple version of the Yoneda Lemma from 
Category Theory and the justification for 
embeddings in Deep Learning.
"All useful novelty in the universe is due to 
processes of variation and selection" -- The 
Selectionist manifesto. Selectionism is the 
generalization of Darwinism. This is why 
Genetic Algorithms work.
Science "has no equations" for concepts like 
Understanding, Reasoning, Learning, 
Abstraction, or Modeling since they are all 
Epistemology level concepts. We cannot even 

start using Science until we have decided what 
Model to use. We must use our experience to 
perform Epistemic Reductions, discarding the 
irrelevant, starting from a messy real world 
problem situation until we are left with a 
scientific Model we can use, such as an 
equation. The focus in AI research should be 
on exactly how we can get our machines to 
perform this pre-scientific Epistemic 
Reduction by themselves.
And the answer to that can not be found 
inside of science.
Chapter Seven.
The Red Pill of Machine Learning.
Reductionism is the use of Models. holelism is 
the avoidance of Models. Models are scientific 
models, theories, hypotheses, formulas, 
equations, naïve models based on personal 
experiences, superstitions, and traditional 
computer programs .

The Deep Learning revolution of 2012 changed 
how we think about Artificial Intelligence, 
Machine Learning, and Deep Neural Networks. 
What changed, and what does this mean going 
forward?
The new cognitive capabilities in our machines 
are the result of a shift in the way we think 
about problem solving. It is the most significant 
change ever in Artificial Intelligence (AI), if 
not in science as a whole. Machine Learning 
(ML) based systems are successfully attacking 
both simple and complex problems using novel 
methods that only became available after 
2012.
We are experiencing a revolution at the level 
of Epistemology which will affect much more 
than just the field of Machine Learning. We 
want to add more of these novel methods to 
our standard problem solving toolkit, but we 

need to understand the trade-offs and the 
conflict.
I argue that understanding Deep Neural 
Networks (Dee enn endz) and other ML 
technologies requires that practitioners adopt 
a Holistic Stance which is (at important 
levels) blatantly incompatible with the 
Reductionist Stance of modern science. As ML 
practitioners we half to make hard choices 
that seemingly contradict many of our core 
scientific convictions. As a result we may get 
the feeling something is wrong. The conflict is 
real and important and the seemingly counter-
intuitive choices make sense only when viewed 
in the light of Epistemology. Improved clarity 
in these matters should alleviate the 
cognitive dissonance experienced by some ML 
practitioners and should accelerate progress 
in these fields.

The title refers to the eye-opening clarity 
some Machine Learning practitioners achieve 
when adopting a Holistic Stance.
Parallel Dichotomies
Sintea-ents Inc researches Natural Language 
Understanding (NLU). We are creating novel 
systems that allow computers to learn to 
Understand human natural languages. Any one 
of them. We use Deep Neural Networks of our 
own design. The goal is to achieve some kind of 
human-like but not necessarily human-level 
Understanding. This is very different from 
traditional Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
which relies on human made Models of some 
language, such as English, and perhaps Models 
of fragments of the world. The NLP and NLU 
disciplines have chosen opposite answers to 
their difficult two-way choices. They are now 
defined by these choices, and we can use their 
stances to highlight the main conflict.

The split is so deep that it cuts through many 
layers of our reality; the following 
dichotomies are all manifestations of this 
incompatibility at different levels, listed by 
impact, but discussed in no particular order.
DOMAIN.
SCIENCE.
THE COMPLEX, 
INCLUDING THE 
MUNDANE.
Epistemology. Reducti
onism.
Holelism.
Brains.
Reasoni
ng.
Understanding.
Problem 
Solving.
Plan it, 
then do 
it.
Just do it.
Artificial 
Intelligence.
20th 
Century
, Good, 
old-
fashion
ed AI
Machine Learning, 
Deep Neural 
Networks.

DOMAIN.
SCIENCE.
THE COMPLEX, 
INCLUDING THE 
MUNDANE.
Natural 
Language In 
Computers.
NLP.
NLU.
The Problem Solving level provides many 
familiar examples of these issues. In our 
mundane lives, we solve many kinds of 
problems every day but our strategies for 
solving them fall into just those two 
categories. For any complicated problem, we 
had better have a plan before we start. But 
most problems the brain deals with every day 
are things we never half to think about. 
Because we do not need to plan or Reason 
about them. These are the millions of low-
level problems we encounter in our mundane 
life every day; and this is the world that our 
AIs will have to operate in.

Consider someone walking across the floor. 
Their brain signals their leg muscles to 
contract in the correct cadence. Do they need 
to consciously plan each step? Do they Reason 
about how to maintain their balance? No; they 
probably don't even know what leg muscles 
they have.
Consider understanding this sentence. Did you 
use Reasoning? Did you use grammar? If you are 
a fluent speaker, you do not need grammars to 
understand or produce language. And you do 
not have time to Reason about language while 
hearing it spoken. Reasoning is slow, but 
Understanding is instantaneous.
Consider someone braking for a stoplight. How 
hard should they push on the brake pedal? Do 
they compute the required differential 
equation? Should such equations be part of the 
drivers license tests?

Consider someone making breakfast. Did they 
half to Reason about anything or plan 
anything, or did they just do what worked 
yesterday, "without thinking about it"? 
Without consciously planning it?
Walking and talking, braking and breakfasting, 
like almost everything we use our brains for, 
rely on learning from our experiences in 
order to re-use anything that has worked in 
the past. And, over time, we learn to correct 
our mistakes. These strategies are simple 
enough that we can identify them in other 
life forms. Dogs Understand a lot but do not 
Reason much. And we can see how they could 
be implemented in something like Neurons in 
brains.
The split in our brains between Reasoning and 
Understanding was examined at length in 
"Thinking fast and slow" by Daniel Khanammin. 
The absolute majority of the brain's efforts 
is spent processing low level sensory input, 

mostly from the eyes. He calls this "System 1"; 
it provides Understanding. Reasoning is done by 
"System 2" based on the Understanding from 
System 1. But most problems we deal with on a 
daily basis do not require System 2 at all.
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
Computers can solve any suitable problem when 
given sufficient human help, such as a 
complete plan for the solution in the form of 
a computer program and valid input data.
But since the AI/ML revolution of 2012 we now 
know how to make computers Understand 
certain problem domains through Machine 
Learning. The acquired Understanding allows 
the machine to "just do it" for many 
different problems in that domain, without 
any human planning, Reasoning, or programming, 
and using incomplete, unreliable, and noisy 
input data.
This is changing how we are building systems 
with cognitive capabilities. Everyone working in 

ML or AI needs to understand the trade-offs 
we must make at the most fundamental 
-- Epistemological -- levels. Modern ML 
requires examining and seriously re-thinking 
many things we were taught to vigilantly 
strive for in our Science, Technology, 
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) 
educations. Things like "Correlation is bad, but 
causality is good" and "Do not jump to 
conclusions on scant evidence" are still solid 
advice everywhere inside science. But when 
building Understanding systems, these 
established strategies and modes of thinking 
no longer work, because correlation discovery 
and handling of sparse, unreliable, and 
inconsistent input data are exactly the kinds 
of tasks we will have to perform, and perform 
well, at these pre-scientific levels.
In order to understand how to do this, we must 
switch to a Holistic Stance.

A Motivating Example.
Beginning Machine Learning students are given 
exercises like this: They are given a large 
spreadsheet, which lists data about houses 
sold a certain year in the US. This information 
includes among other things the zip code of 
the house, the living area in square feet, lot 
size, the number of bedrooms and bathrooms, 
the year the house was built, and the final 
sale price of the house.
We would like to be able to predict this final 
sale price, given the corresponding data for a 
current house we are about to list for sale. 
The given spreadsheet is the data the 
student will use to train a Deep Neural 
Network. It is the entire learning corpus; it 
contains everything the system will ever 
know.
These students can download Deep Neural 
Network libraries like "Karis" and 
"TensorFlow", and runnable examples for 

many kinds of problems , including useful 
training data, from places like Hugging Face 
and GitHub. Next the student trains 
("learns") their network using the given data. 
This may take a while. But when learning 
finishes, they can give the system data for a 
house it has never seen and it will quite 
reliably predict what the house might sell 
for.
This was the goal of the exercise. The 
student has created a system that 
Understands how to estimate real estate 
prices from listings. But the student still 
does not Understand anything about real 
estate. The predictive capability (that many 
people working in real estate would be willing 
to pay money for) is 100% based on 
Understanding in the Deep Neural Network - 
In the computer. And because all libraries and 
many pre-solved examples of this nature 

were freely available, the student did not 
half to do much programming either.
The Vision.
This is desirable. This is what AI should mean. 
The computer Understands the problem so 
that we don't half to. Programming in the 
future will be like having a conversation with 
a competent co-worker, and when the machine 
Understands exactly what we want done, it 
will simply do it. No programming required on 
our part, or on part of the machine, once a 
suitable (partially Reductionist) framework 
exists. The rest is learning, and it can be done 
in any human language with equal ease.
We are on the right track towards something 
worthy of the name "AI" with current Machine 
Learning. Going forward, there are thousands 
of paths to choose from, and the ability to 
choose wisely will depend on our ability to 
understand and adopt a Holistic Stance.

Reductionism and holelism.
These are important terms of the art in 
Epistemology. Both of them have numerous 
correct, useful, and compatible definitions. We 
will henceforth use the following definitions 
for reasons of usefulness and simplicity:
Reductionism is the use of Models.
holelism is the avoidance of Models.
Models are scientific models, theories, 
hypotheses, formulas, equations, naïve models 
based on personal experiences, superstitions 
(If you can believe that), and traditional 
computer programs. In a Reductionist paradigm, 
these Models are created by humans, 
ostensibly by scientists, and are then used, 
ostensibly by engineers, to solve real-world 
problems. Model creation and Model use both 
require that these humans Understand the 
problem domain, the problem at hand, the 
previously known shared Models available, and 
how to design and use Models. A Ph.D. degree 

could be seen as a formal license to create 
new Models. Mathematics can be seen as a 
discipline for Model manipulation.
But now -- by avoiding the use of human made 
Models and switching to Holistic Methods -- 
data scientists, programmers, and others do 
not themselves half to Understand the 
problems they are given. They are no longer 
asked to provide a computer program or to 
otherwise solve a problem in a traditional 
Reductionist or scientific way. Holistic Systems 
like Dee enn endz can provide solutions to 
many problems by first learning about the 
domain from data and solved examples, and 
then, in production, to match new situations to 
this gathered experience. These matches are 
guesses, but with sufficient learning the 
results can be highly reliable.
We will initially use computer-based Holistic 
Methods to solve individual and specific 
problems, such as self-driving cars. Over 

time, increasing numbers of Artificial 
Understanders will be able to provide 
immediate answers -- guesses -- to wider and 
wider ranges of problems. We can expect to see 
cellphone apps with such good command of 
language that it feels like talking to a 
competent co-worker. Voice will become the 
preferred way to interact with our personal 
AIs.
Early and low-level but useful AI will 
manifest as computers that can solve problems 
we ourselves cannot (or cannot be bothered 
to) solve. They need not be superhuman; all 
they need to have in order to be extremely 
useful is exactly the ability to autonomously 
discover higher level abstractions in some 
given problem domain, starting from low level 
sensory input, for example, by learning from 
images or reading books. Such systems now exist.
If we want to understand Machine Learning, 
then we need to understand all the 

strategies in the rightmost column in the 
tables that follow. They are all part of a 
Holistic Stance and if we are working in Machine 
Learning, we need to adopt as many of them as 
possible.
Differences at the Level of Epistemology.
REDUCTIONISM AND 
SCIENCE. VERSUS
HOLELISM AND 
MACHINE LEARNING
The use of Models, 
versus
The avoidance of 
Models.
Reasoning, versus
Understanding.
Requires Human 
Understanding, 
versus
Provides Human-
like Understanding.
Problems are 
solved in an 
abstract 
Modelspace. versus
Problems are solved 
directly in the 
problem domain.
Unbeatable 
strategy for 
dealing with a wide 
May handle some 
problems in domains 
where Reductionist 

REDUCTIONISM AND 
SCIENCE. VERSUS
HOLELISM AND 
MACHINE LEARNING
range of suitable 
problems faced by 
humans. versus
Models cannot be 
created or used, 
known as "Bizarre 
Domains".
Handles many 
important complicat
ed problems such 
as going to the 
Moon or a highway 
system. versus
Handles many 
important complex p
roblems such as 
protein folding and 
playing Go.
Handles problems 
requiring planning 
or cooperation. 
versus
Handles simple 
mundane problems 
such as 
Understanding 
language or vision, 
or making 
breakfast.

Many rows in these tables discuss hard trade-
offs where compromises are impossible or 
prohibitively expensive; these are identified 
by boldface numbers in the first column. 
Remaining rows may not be clear trade-offs or 
even disjoint alternatives. Mixed systems are 
described in a separate chapter.
These form the core of these dichotomies and 
are discussed in most of what follows but also 
in detail at the chapter on introducing AI 
Epistemology and in videos of talks.
A weather report is based on Models in 
meteorology. To solve the problem directly in 
the problem domain, open a window to check if 
it smells like rain.
Reductionism is the greatest invention our 
species has ever made. But Reductionist 
Models cannot be created or used when any 
one of a multitude of blocking issues are 

present. Models work "in theory" or "in a 
laboratory" where we can isolate a device, 
organism, or phenomenon from a changing 
environment. However, complex situations may 
involve tracking and responding to a large 
number of conflicting and unreliable signals 
from a constantly changing world or 
environment. Reductionism is here at a severe 
disadvantage and can rarely perform above 
the level of statistical Models.
In contrast, Holistic Machine Learning Methods 
learning from unfiltered inputs can discover 
correlations that humans might miss, and can 
construct internal pattern-based structures 
to provide recognition, Epistemic Reduction, 
abstraction, prediction, noise rejection, and 
other cognitive capabilities.
Humans generally use Holistic Methods for 
seemingly simple (but in reality, complex) 
mundane problems, like Understanding vision, 
human language, learning to walk, or making 

breakfast. Computers use them for very 
complex problems (ML based AI in general, such 
as protein folding and playing go) but also 
simpler ones, such as Real Estate pricing.
Main trade-offs.
REDUCTIONISM AND 
SCIENCE. VERSUS,
HOLELISM AND 
MACHINE LEARNING
Optimality -- the 
best answer, 
versus
Economy -- reuse 
known useful 
answers.
Completeness -- 
all answers, 
versus
Promptness -- 
accept first useful 
answer.
Repeatability -- 
same answer every 
time, versus
Learning -- results 
improve with 
practice.
Extrapolation -- 
In low-
dimensionality 
domains, versus
Interpolation -- 
even in high-
dimensionality 
domains.
Transparency -- Intuition -- accept 

REDUCTIONISM AND 
SCIENCE. VERSUS,
HOLELISM AND 
MACHINE LEARNING
Understand the 
process to get the 
answer, versus
useful answers 
even if achieved by 
unknown or 
"subconscious" 
means.
Explainability -- 
Understand the 
answer, versus
Positive Ignorance 
-- no need to even 
understand the 
problem or problem 
domain.
Shareability -- 
abstract Models 
are taught and 
communicated using 
language or 
software, versus
Copy-ability -- ML 
Understanding (a 
Competence) can be 
copied as a memory 
image.
Optimality, Completeness, and Repeatability 
are only available in theoretical Modelspaces 
and sometimes under laboratory conditions. 

Economy and Promptness had much higher 
survival value in evolutionary history than 
Optimality and Completeness.
 The strongest hint that a system is Holistic is 
that the results improve with practice 
because the system learns from its mistakes. 
In Machine Learning, a larger learning corpus is 
in general better than a smaller one because 
it provides more opportunities for making 
mistakes to learn from, such as corner cases.
Models created by humans have manageable 
numbers of parameters because the scientist 
or engineer working on the problem has done a 
(hopefully correct) Epistemic Reduction from 
a complex and messy world to a computable 
Model. This allows experimentation with what-
if scenarios by varying Model parameters. It is 
up to the Model user to determine which 
extrapolations are reasonable.
In Holistic ML systems, we are getting you-stew 
systems with millions or billions of 

parameters. These structures are very 
difficult to analyze, and just like with human 
intelligences, the best way to estimate their 
competence is through testing. Extrapolation is 
typically out of scope for Holistic systems.
The majority of end users will have no 
interest in how some machine came up with some 
obviously correct answer; they will just accept 
it, the way we accept our own Understanding 
of language, even though we do not know how 
we do it.
We now find ourselves asking our machines to 
solve problems we either don't know how to 
solve, or can't be bothered to figure out how 
to solve.
We have reached a major benefit of AI -- we 
can be positively ignorant of many mundane 
things and will be happy to delegate such 
matters to our machines so that we may play, 
or focus on more important things.

Some schools of thought tend to overvalue 
explainability. To them, ML is a serious step 
down from results obtained scientifically 
where we can all inspect the causality - for 
instance in Reductionist production ("expert") 
systems.
But the bottom line is that today we can often 
choose between
One. Understanding the problem domain, 
problem, the use of science and relevant 
Models, and the answer.
Or Two. Just getting a useful answer 
without even bothering to Understand the 
problem or the problem domain.
The latter (Positive Ignorance) is a lot closer 
to AI than the first, and we can expect the 
use of Holistic Methods to continue to 
increase.
 Science strives towards a consensus world 
Model in order to facilitate communication and 

minimize costly engineering mistakes caused by 
ignorance and misunderstandings. Scientific 
communication requires a high-level context 
-  a World Model -  shared by participants, and 
agreed-upon signals such as words, math, and 
software.
But direct Understanding, such as the skills 
to become a chess grandmaster or a downhill 
skier, cannot be shared using words -- the 
experience must be acquired using individual 
practice. Computer based systems that learn a 
skill through practice can share the entire 
Understanding so acquired by copying the 
memory content to another machine.
Advantages of Holistic Methods.
REDUCTIONISM 
AND SCIENCE. 
VERSUS
HOLELISM AND 
MACHINE LEARNING
NP-Hard problems 
cannot be solved. 
versus
Finds valid solutions 
by guessing well 
based on a lifetime 

REDUCTIONISM 
AND SCIENCE. 
VERSUS
HOLELISM AND 
MACHINE LEARNING
of experience
GuyGo -- Garbage 
In, Garbage Out is 
a recognized 
problem. versus
Copes with missing, 
erroneous, and 
misleading inputs
Brittleness -- 
Experience 
catastrophic 
failures at edges 
of competence. 
versus
Antifragile; learns 
from mistakes, 
especially almost-
correct guesses and 
small, correctable 
failures
Models of a 
constantly 
changing world 
are obsolete the 
moment they are 
created. versus
Incremental learning 
provides continuous 
adaptation to a 
constantly changing 
world
Algorithms may be 
incorrect or may 
Self-repairing 
systems can tolerate 

REDUCTIONISM 
AND SCIENCE. 
VERSUS
HOLELISM AND 
MACHINE LEARNING
be incorrectly 
implemented. 
versus
or correct internal 
errors.
 It is because we desire certainty, optimality, 
completeness, et cetera. that NP-Hardness 
becomes a problem. There are many problems 
where it is relatively easy to find a provably 
valid solution but where finding all solutions 
can be very expensive. Real world traveling 
salesmen merrily travel along reasonable 
routes.
If a Reductionist system does not have 
complete and correct input data, it either 
cannot get started or produces questionable 
output. But it is an important requirement of 
real-world Understanding Machines that they 
be able to detect what is salient (important) in 
their input in order to avoid paying attention 

to -- and learning from -- noise. And they 
half to deal with incomplete, erroneous, and 
misleading input generated by millions of other 
intelligent agents with goals at odds with 
their own. They need to be able to detect 
omissions, duplications, errors, noise, lies, et 
cetera and the only Epistemologically 
plausible way to do this is to relate the input 
to similar input they have understood in the 
past -- what they already know. They need to 
understand what matters but if they can also 
Understand some of the noise ("This is 
advertising"), they can exploit that.
There are many image and video apps available 
featuring Image Understanding based on Deep 
Learning. These apps can remove backgrounds, 
sharpen details like eyelashes, restore 
damaged photographs, et cetera. We need to 
keep in mind that the ability of Holistic 
systems to fill in data and detect noise 
depends on them having learned from similar 

data in the past. We note that all the image 
improvements are confabulations based on 
prior experience from their learning corpora. 
But we can also note that image composition 
using these methods yields totally seamless 
images, very far from cut-and-paste of 
pixels.
And quite similarly, we find language 
confabulation by systems like GPT-3 to flow 
seamlessly between sentences and topics. They 
have nothing to say, but they say it well. 
However, they bring us closer to meaningful 
language generation and when we achieve that, 
the public perception of what computers are 
capable of will totally change.
Most of Cognition is Re-Cognition. Being able to 
recognize that something has occurred before 
and knowing what might happen next has 
enormous survival value for any animal 
species. A mature human has used their eyes 
and other senses for decades; this represents 

an enormous learning corpus and they can 
Understand anything they have prior 
experience of. The mistakes made by humans, 
animals and by Holistic ML systems are very 
often of a "near miss" variety which provides 
an opportunity to learn to do it better next 
time.
Contrast this to Reductionist software systems 
created for similar goals. Rule based systems 
have long been infamous for their 
Brittleness. As long as the rules in the 
ruleset match the current input and reality 
perfectly, the results will be useful, 
repeatable and reliable. But at the edges of 
their competence, where the matches become 
more tenuous, the quality rapidly drops. Minor 
mistakes in the rule sets (in the World 
Modeling) may lead such systems to return 
spectacularly incorrect results.
Sometimes repeatability is important, and 
sometimes tracking a changing world by 

continuously learning more about it is 
important. In ML, Continuous Incremental 
Learning makes it possible to stay up-to-date. 
If we want repeatability, we can emit a 
"condensed, cleaned, and frozen Competence 
file" from a learner that can be loaded into 
non-learning (read-only) cloud-based 
Understanding Machines that serve the world 
and provide repeatability between scheduled 
software and competence releases.[3]
In the case of Reductionist systems, such as 
cell phone OS releases, we are you-stew 
getting well-tested new versions with minor 
bug fixes and occasional major features at 
regular intervals. Such systems "learn" only 
in the sense that the people who created 
them have learned more and put these 
insights into the new release.
Reductionist systems working with complete 
and correct input data are expected to provide 
correct and repeatable results according to 

the implementation of the algorithm. But both 
the algorithm and the implementation may have 
errors. If the algorithm does not adequately 
Model its reality, then we have Reduction 
Errors. In the implementation, we may have 
bugs.
Holistic software systems can be designed to a 
different standard of correctness. Since 
input data is normally incomplete and noisy, 
and results are based on emergent effects, 
we can expect similar enough results even if 
parts of the system have been damaged, for 
instance by Catastrophic Forgetting. Holistic 
systems can be made capable of self-repair 
using incremental learning. This has been 
observed in the Deep Learning community.
Another technique is that when using multiple 
parallel threads in learning, there may be 
conflicts that would normally require locking 
of some values. But if the operations are 
simple enough, such as just incrementing a 

value, we can forego thread safety and 
locking since the worst outcome is the loss of a 
single increment in a system that uses 
emergent results from millions of such 
values, and the mistake would (in a well 
designed system) be self-correcting in the 
long run. At the cloud level, absolute 
consistency may not be as hard a requirement 
as it is for Reductionist systems. Much larger 
mistakes can be expected to be attributable to 
misunderstandings of the corpus or poor corpus 
coverage.
General Strategies.
Decomposition into 
smaller problems, 
versus
Generalization may 
lead to an easier 
problem.
A Human discards 
everything 
irrelevant based 
on how new 
A Machine discards 
everything 
irrelevant based on 
how new information 

information 
matches existing 
experience. versus
matches existing 
experience.
Modularity. versus Composability.
Gather valid, 
correct, and 
complete input 
data. versus
Use whatever 
information is 
available, and use 
all of it.
Formal, Rigorous 
Methods. versus
Informal Ad-hoc 
Methods.
Absolute control. 
versus
Creativity.
Intelligent Design, 
versus
Evolution.
The Reductionist battle cry is, "The whole is 
equal to the sum of its parts" which gives us a 
license to split a large complicated problem 
into smaller problems, to solve each of those 
using some suitable Model, and then to combine 

all the sub-solutions into a Model based 
solution for the original, larger problem, such 
as in moon-shots, highway systems, 
international banking, and generally in 
industrial intelligent design.
This works in simple and 
some complicated domains, but cannot be done 
in complex domains, where everything 
potentially affects everything else. Splitting 
a complex system may cause any emergent 
effects to disappear, confounding analysis. 
Examples of complex problem domains are 
politics, neuroscience, ecology, economy 
(including stock markets), and cellular biology. 
All life sciences operate in a complex problem 
domain because life itself is complex. Some say 
"Biology has Physics envy" because in the life 
sciences, Reductionist Models are difficult to 
create and justify. On the other hand, 
"Physics is for simple problems."

Problems with many complex interdependencies 
and unknown webs of causality can now be 
attacked using Deep Neural Networks. These 
systems discover useful correlations and may 
often find solutions using mere hints in the 
input which match their prior experience; 
Reductionist strategies with correctness 
requirements outlaw this. It is notable that 
one of the larger triumphs of Holistic 
Methods is Protein Folding, which is a problem 
at the very core of the life sciences.
So Holistic Understanding of a complex system 
can be acquired by observing it over time and 
learning from its behavior. There is no need 
to split the problem into pieces. Part of the 
Holistic Stance is that we give the machine 
everything --holelism comes from the greek 
word, holoss (omicron, lambda, omicron, sigma, in 
the written text) -- the whole, that is to 
say, all the information we have. If we start 
filtering the input data - by cleaning it up -- 

then the system will effectively learn from 
a Pollyanna version of the world, which will 
be confusing once it has to deal with real-life 
inputs in a production environment. If we want 
our machines to learn to Understand the 
world all by themselves, then we should not 
start by applying heavy-handed heuristic 
cleanup operations of our own design on their 
input data.
Sometimes, Reductionist strategies are clearly 
inferior. Natural Language Understanding is 
such a domain. Language Understanding in a 
fluent speaker is almost 100% Holistic because 
it is almost entirely based on prior exposure. 
We are now finding out that it is much easier 
to build a machine to learn any language on the 
planet from scratch than it is to build a "Good 
Old-Fashioned Artificial Intelligence" 20th 
Century Reductionist AI based style machine 
that Understands a single language such as 
English.

The process where a human, by using their 
Understanding, discards everything irrelevant 
to arrive at what matters is called "Epistemic 
Reduction" and is discussed in the first five 
chapters  in this book. This is the most 
important operation in Reductionism, but for 
some reason discussions of Reductionism in the 
past have tended to focus on other aspects: 
perhaps this is a new result. ML systems 
discard with little fanfare anything that was 
expected and that has been seen before as 
boring, harmless, or otherwise ignorable. They 
may also discard things significantly outside of 
their experience as noise.
Things can only be reduced away at the 
semantic level they can be recognized at. 
Operations capable of Epistemic Reduction at 
multiple layers discard anything that's 
understood at that layer, and they may pass 
on "upward" to the next higher semantic layer 
a summary of what they discarded plus 

everything they did not Understand at their 
level. And higher levels do the same.
This is why Deep Learning is deep.
 Intelligently designed systems are often made 
up out of interchangeable Modules, which 
allow for easy replacement in case of failure, 
and in some cases (and especially in software) 
allow for customization of functionality by 
replacing or adding modules. These modules 
have well-specified interfaces that allow for 
such interconnections.
In the Holistic case we can consider a human 
cell where thousands of proteins interact on 
contact or as required, with many substances 
floating around in the cellular fluid. It is not 
the result of intelligent design, and it shows. 
There are overlaps and redundancies that may 
contribute to more reliable operation and 
there are multiple (potentially complex) 
mechanisms keeping each other in check.

Or we can consider music, where multiple notes 
in a chord and different timbres in a symphony 
orchestra in a composition will conjure an 
emergent harmonic whole that sounds 
different than the sum of its parts. Or 
consider spices in a soup, or opinions in a 
meeting that leads to a consensus.
The word "Composability" fits this capability in 
the Holistic case. Unfortunately, in much 
literature it is merely used as a sinnanom for 
its Reductionist counterpart "Modularity".
As discussed in the GuyGo case, in the section 
above, Holistic ML systems can fill in missing 
details starting from very scant evidence - 
compare for example confabulations of systems 
like GPT-3 and image enhancement apps. They 
supply the missing details by jumping to 
conclusions based on few clues and lots of 
experience.
Since we are not omniscient and don't even 
know what is happening behind our backs, scant 

evidence is all we will ever have, but it is 
amazing how effective scant evidence can be in 
a familiar context. We can drive a car through 
fog or find an alarm clock in absolute 
darkness. The more the system has learned, 
the less input is needed to arrive at a 
reasonable identification of the problem and-
hentz retrieve a previously-discovered 
working solution.
Formal methods and experimental rigorousness 
make for good science.
On the other hand, Holistic methods can 
follow tenuous threads, hoping for stronger 
threads towards some solution, with little 
effort spent on backtracking or documentation 
because once a solution is found, it is the only 
thing that matters. Tracking has little value 
in non-repeating situations or when using 
Holistic Methods at massive scales, such as in 
Deep Learning.

Absolute control requires that we know 
exactly what the problems and solutions are 
and all we need to do is implement-them. Once 
deployed, systems frozen in this manner, 
which are exactly implementing the Models of 
their creators, cannot improve by learning, 
since there is no room for variation in the 
existing process, and-hentz no 
experimentation, and no way to discover 
further improvements. Only Holistic systems 
can provide creativity and useful Novelty. We 
also observe that "learning itself" is a 
creative act, since it must fit new information 
into an existing network of prior experience.
 Just like the term "holelism" has been 
abused, so has "Intelligent Design", which is a 
perfectly reasonable term for a Reductionist 
industrial end-to-end practice that 
consistently provides excellent results. On 
the Holistic side, Evolution in nature has 
created wonderful solutions to all kinds of 

problems that plants and animals need to 
handle.
But we can put Evolution (also known in the 
general sense as Selectionism) to work for us 
in our Holistic machines. They can create new, 
wonderful designs with a biological-flavor to 
them that sometimes (depending on the 
problem) can outperform intelligently 
designed alternatives.
Evolution is the most Holistic phenomenon we 
know. No goal functions, no Models, no 
equations. Evolution is not a scientific theory. 
Science cannot contain it; it must be discussed 
in Epistemology.
Mixed Systems.
Deep Neural Networks can perform autonomous 
Epistemic Reduction to find high level 
representations for low level input, such as 
pixels in an image or characters in text. 
Current vision Understanding systems can 

reliably identify thousands of different 
kinds of objects from many different angles in 
a variety of lighting conditions and weather. 
They can classify what they see, but do not 
necessarily Understand much beyond that; 
such as the expected behaviors of other 
"intentional agents" like cars, pedestrians, or 
cats.
Therefore, at the moment in 2022, most 
deployments of Machine Learning use a mixture 
of Reductionist and Holistic methods 
-- equations and formulas devised by humans 
implemented as computer code, and some inputs 
from a Deep Neural Network solving a 
subproblem that requires it, such as vision 
Understanding.
Self-driving cars use DN endz for 
Understanding vision, radar, and lidar images 
(discovering high level information like "a 
pedestrian on the side of the road" from pixel 
based images) and this Understanding has 

(until recently) been fed to logic and rule 
based programs that implement the decision 
making ("Avoid driving into anything, period") 
that is used to control the car.
The trend here is to move more and more 
responsibilities into the Deep Neural Network, 
and over time to remove the hand coded parts. 
In essence, the network learns not only to 
see, but learns to Understand traffic. We are 
delegating more and more of our 
"Understanding of how to drive" to the 
vehicle itself.
This is desirable.
Experimental Epistemology.
"Epistemology is the theory of knowledge. It is 
concerned with the mind's relation to 
reality."

This includes artificial minds. An introduction 
to Epistemology should benefit anyone working 
in the AI/ML field.
Scientific statements look like F = MA, 
Newton's second law, or E = MC squared, 
Einstein's famous equation, and can all be 
proven and/or derived from other accepted 
results, or verified experimentally.
Algebra is built on lemmas that are not part of 
Algebra; they cannot be proven inside of 
Algebra.
Similarly, Epistemological statements are not 
provable in science because science is built on 
top of Epistemology. But when science is not 
helping, such as in Bizarre Domains, then 
setting scientific methodology aside and 
"dropping down" to the level of Epistemology 
sometimes works.
Epistemology is, just like Philosophy in 
general, an armchair thinking exercise, and 

the results are judged on internal coherence 
and consistency with other accepted theory 
rather than by proofs or experiments.
However, the availability of Understanding 
Machines, such as Dee enn endz now suddenly 
provides the opportunity for actual 
experiments in Epistemology. Consider the 
following statements from the domain of 
Epistemology, and how each of them can be 
viewed as an implementation hint for AI 
designers. We are already able to measure 
their effects on system competence.
"You can only learn that which you 
already almost know" -- Patrick Winston, 
MIT.
"All intelligences are fallible" -- 
Monickah Anderson.
"In order to detect that something is new 
you need to recognize everything old" -- 
Monickah Anderson.

"You cannot Reason about that which you 
do not Understand" -- Monickah Anderson.
"You are known by the company you keep" 
-- Simple version of the Yoneda Lemma 
from Category Theory and the justification 
for embeddings in Deep Learning.
"All useful novelty in the universe is 
due to processes of variation and 
selection". -- The Selectionist manifesto. 
Selectionism is the generalization of 
Darwinism. This is why Genetic Algorithms 
work.
Science "has no equations" for concepts like 
Understanding, Reasoning, Learning, 
Abstraction, or Modeling since they are all 
Epistemology level concepts. We cannot 
even start using science until we have decided 
what Model to use. We must use our 
experience to perform Epistemic 
Reductions, discarding the irrelevant, starting 
from a messy real world problem situation 

until we are left with a scientific Model we 
can use, such as an equation. The focus in AI 
research should be on exactly how we can get 
our machines to perform this pre-scientific 
Epistemic Reduction by themselves.
And the answer to that can not be found 
inside of science.
Artificial General Intelligence
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) was a 
theoretical 20th Century Reductionist AI 
attempt to go beyond the "Narrow AI" of 
domain specific expert systems -- closer to 
the "General Intelligence" they thought 
humans had. The term was mostly used by 
independent researchers, amateurs and 
enthusiasts.
But the "AGI" term was not well enough 
defined and was not backed by sufficient 
theory to provide any AI implementation 
guidance, and what little progress had been 

made by these groups was overtaken by Holistic 
Methods after 2012.
Today we know that the entire premise of 
20th century Reductionist AGI was wrong:
 Humans are not General Intelligences...
at birth.
Instead, we are General Learners, capable of 
learning almost any skill or knowledge 
required in a wide range of problem domains. If 
we want human-compatible cognitive systems, 
then we should build them in our image in this 
respect. To build machines that learn and jump 
to conclusions on scant evidence.
Decades ago, "AGI" implied a human-programmed 
Reductionist hand-coded program based on Logic 
and Reasoning that can solve any problem 
because the programmers anticipated it. To 
argue against claims that this was impossible, 
the AGI community came up with the promise or 
threat of self-improving AI.

But the amount of code in our cognitive 
systems has shrunk from 6 million propositions 
in Cyke around 1990 to 600 lines of code to 
play video games around 2017,  to about 13 lines 
of Karis code in some research reports. And 
now there's Auto-em-el and other efforts at 
eliminating all remaining programming from em 
el.
The problems are not in the code. There is 
almost no code left to improve in modern 
Machine Learning systems. All that matters is 
the corpus. We can now (after 2012) see that 
Machine Learning is an absolute requirement 
for anything worthy of the name "AI".
Which makes recursive self-improvement 
leading to evil superhuman omniscient logic-
based godlike Artificial General Intelligence a 
20th century Reductionist AI myth.
We must focus on Artificial General Learners .

Afterword.
Science was created to stop people from 
overrating correlations and jumping to 
erroneous conclusions on scant evidence and 
then sharing those conclusions with others, 
leading to compounded mistakes and much 
wasted effort.
Consequently, promoting a Holistic Stance has 
long been a career-ending move in academia, 
and especially in Computer Science. But now we 
suddenly have Machine Learning that performs 
cognitive tasks such as protein folding, playing 
Go, and estimating house prices at useful 
levels using exactly a Holistic Stance.
So now Science itself has a cognitive dissonance. 
This is a conflict about what Science "is" Or 
should be.
Ignorance of (these stances) leads people to 
develop significant personal cognitive 
dissonances which is why discussions about 
these issues are very unpopular among people 

with solid STEM educations. But the dichotomy 
is real; we need to deal with it. Our choices so 
far seem to have been to:
claim the dichotomy doesn't exist (... but 
Schrödinger and Pirsig also discuss it).
claim that the Holistic Stance doesn't 
work (... but Deep Learning works).
claim that Reductionist methods are a 
requirement (... hobbling our toolkits for a 
principle).
The Reductionist Stance also makes it difficult 
to imagine and accept things like:
Systems capable of autonomous Epistemic 
Reduction.
Systems that do not have a goal function.
Systems that improve with practice.
Systems that exploit emergent effects.
Systems that by themselves make 
decisions about what matters most.

Systems that occasionally give a wrong 
answer but are nevertheless very useful.
So after a serious education in Machine 
Learning we don't actually need to do almost 
any programming at all, and we don't need to 
understand anybody else's problem domains. 
Because we don't half to perform any 
Epistemic Reduction ourselves.
We should recognize this for what it "is". AI 
was supposed to solve our problems for us so 
we would not half to learn or understand any 
new problem-domains. To not half to think. 
And that's what we have today, in Machine 
Learning, and with Holistic Methods in general. 
Why are some people surprised or unhappy 
about this? In my opinion, this is AI, this is what 
we have been trying to accomplish for decades.
People who claim "Machine Understanding is not 
AI" are asking for human-level human-centric 
Reasoning and are, at their peril, blind to the 

nayscent ML based Understanding we can 
achieve today.
With expected reasonable improvements in 
Machine Understanding capabilities, familiarity 
and acceptance of the Holistic Stance will 
become a requirement for ML and AI based 
work. It will likely take years for our 
educational system to adjust.
This has been: Monika's Little Pills,
read to you by a computer.
Thank you for listening.

