Semantic Infrastructure: Entropy-Respecting
Computation in a Modular Universe
August 2025
Abstract
This monograph proposes a foundational framework for semantic modular com-
putation grounded in the principles of the Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum (RSVP)
theory, category theory, and sheaf-theoretic structure. Moving beyond file-based
version control systems like GitHub, we define a symmetric monoidal ∞-category
of semantic modules, equipped with a homotopy-colimit-based merge operator that
resolves computational and conceptual divergences through higher coherence.
Each semantic module is modeled as an entropy-respecting construct, encoding
functions, theories, and transformations as type-safe, sheaf-gluable, and obstruction-
aware structures. We introduce a formal merge operator derived from obstruction
theory, cotangent complexes, and mapping stacks, capable of resolving multi-way
semantic merges across divergent forks. The system integrates deeply with RSVP
field logic, treating code and concept as flows within a plenum of semantic energy.
We propose implementations in Haskell using dependent types, lens-based traver-
sals, and type-indexed graphs, along with potential extensions to blockchain-based
identity tracking, Docker-integrated module deployment, and a latent space knowl-
edge graph for semantic traversal.
This monograph provides the formal infrastructure for a new kind of open,
modular, intelligent computation—where meaning composes, entropy flows, and
semantic structure becomes executable.
1

1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Modern software development platforms, such as GitHub, are constrained by fundamental
limitations that obstruct meaningful collaboration. Repositories rely on symbolic names-
paces, lacking semantic grounding, which leads to collisions and misaligned contexts.
Version control prioritizes syntactic changes over conceptual coherence, with line-based
diffs failing to capture the intent of code. Merges resolve textual conflicts without regard
for semantic relationships, and forks create fragmented branches without mechanisms to
reconcile divergent interpretations. These issues reflect a misalignment between compu-
tational infrastructure and the semantic, entropy-driven nature of collaboration. This
monograph proposes a semantic, compositional, entropy-respecting framework that rede-
fines computation as structured flows of meaning, grounded in mathematical physics and
category theory.
1.2
Philosophical Foundations
Drawing from the Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum (RSVP) theory, we model compu-
tation as dynamic interactions of scalar coherence fields Φ, vector inference flows ⃗v, and
entropy fields S over a spacetime manifold M = R × R3. Computational modules are lo-
calized condensates of semantic energy, integrated through thermodynamic, categorical,
and topological consistency. The framework leverages:
• Category Theory: For compositional modularity and semantic transformations [1].
• Sheaf Theory: For local-to-global consistency in merges [2].
• Obstruction Theory: To quantify mergeability via cotangent complexes [3].
• Homotopy Theory: For higher coherence in multi-way merges [4].
• Haskell and Type Theory: For practical implementation [5].
This monograph constructs a formal system to replace syntactic version control with a
semantic infrastructure for executable meaning.
2
From Source Control to Semantic Computation
2.1
The GitHub Illusion: Permissions Masquerading as Names-
pace
The current global infrastructure for collaborative coding—centered around platforms like
GitHub, GitLab, and Bitbucket—presents itself as a coherent namespace for projects,
contributors, and computational modules. This appearance is deceptive. Beneath its
clean user interface and social coding veneer, GitHub operates as a permissioned layer
over traditional file systems and symbolic version control. Its structure is not ontological
but operational: it organizes who can read, write, and execute, not what things are or
how they relate.
GitHub repositories are little more than glorified ~/user/project directories with
cosmetic metadata. Branches simulate multiplicity but are essentially temporal forks
2

of file state. The underlying Git system, while ingenious in its content-based commit
hashing and tree structure, still anchors meaning to syntax: merge conflicts are lines in
a file, not semantic contradictions. There is no awareness of function, type, theory, or
ontology. A function called transform() in two branches may represent wildly different
concepts, yet GitHub cannot tell. Names collide. Meaning does not.
Worse still, forking creates epistemic fragmentation. Semantic divergence—two peo-
ple exploring conceptually related but non-equivalent evolutions of a model—becomes a
structural break, rather than a traceable, composable lineage. The illusion of version
control is that it preserves change, when in fact it buries intent beneath syntax.
2.2
Beyond Line Diffs: Why Semantic Meaning Doesn't Com-
pose in Git
The heart of the problem is that Git and GitHub were not designed to handle semantic
modules. They were built to track files and textual edits, not functions, proofs, type
transformations, or field-theoretic roles. As a result, even modestly complex systems of
co-evolving components become brittle, merge-prone, and semantically opaque.
Consider three contributors modifying different aspects of a codebase: one improves
a mathematical model, another optimizes the data pipeline, and a third refactors type
declarations for clarity.
In Git, these become three sets of file-level diffs, potentially
colliding in lines or structure. There is no global view of which semantic modules were
affected, what dependencies were touched, or how their conceptual alignment changed.
This is not merely a usability issue. It is a representational error. The assumption
that text equals meaning is false. It fails especially for scientific computing, artificial
intelligence, theory-building, and systems where correctness is determined by more than
syntactic compatibility.
Merges in Git fail not because humans cannot reason about
them, but because Git has no internal theory of what is being merged.
2.3
Toward Modular Entropy: Computation as Structured Co-
herence
To move beyond this collapse of meaning, we propose a new approach: semantic modular
computation. This approach views each computational module not as a file or blob of
text, but as a structured field of coherent roles, transformations, and entropic flows. It
takes seriously the idea that code, data, and theory are not merely stored, but expressed.
Each module in this framework is treated as a condensate of meaning: a packet
of structured entropy, bounded by its dependencies, roles, and transformations. These
modules live not in a file system, but in a semantic space indexed by type, function, and
ontological role. They are composed not by appending lines or concatenating diffs, but
by merging structured flows through higher categorical constructions.
This shift requires a fundamentally different substrate. Instead of Git branches, we
need sheaf-theoretic contexts. Instead of line diffs, we need obstruction classes and derived
stacks. Instead of symbolic names like main and dev, we need hash-addressed entropy
modules with traceable morphisms between semantic states.
Semantic computation is not just a change in tooling; it is a change in worldview.
It treats computation as a thermodynamic, categorical, and epistemic process. In the
chapters that follow, we will construct the infrastructure needed to make this real: sym-
3

metric monoidal categories of semantic modules, merge operators derived from homotopy
colimits, and a practical encoding of these ideas in type-safe languages like Haskell.
But we begin here, with a simple insight: GitHub is not a namespace. It is a container.
And what we need is not more containers, but a language for meaning that composes.
3
RSVP Theory and Modular Fields
3.1
Scalar (Φ), Vector (⃗v), and Entropy (S) Fields
The Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum (RSVP) theory provides the mathematical foun-
dation for modeling computation as dynamic flows of entropy and coherence.
RSVP
posits a spacetime manifold M = R × R3 with Minkowski metric gµν = diag(−1, 1, 1, 1),
over which three coupled fields evolve:
• Scalar Coherence Field Φ: Represents semantic alignment, mapping computational
states to a measure of conceptual coherence.
• Vector Inference Flow ⃗v: Directs updates to semantic states, analogous to atten-
tional shifts or dependency traversals.
• Entropy Field S: Quantifies uncertainty or prediction error, reflecting the thermo-
dynamic cost of computation.
These fields evolve via Itô stochastic differential equations (SDEs):
dΦt = [∇· (D∇Φt) −⃗vt · ∇Φt + λSt] dt + σΦdWt,
d⃗vt = [−∇St + γΦt⃗vt] dt + σvdW ′
t,
dSt =
[
δ∇· ⃗vt −ηS2
t
]
dt + σSdW ′′
t ,
where D, λ, γ, δ, η, σΦ, σv, σS are parameters tuned to computational contexts, and
Wt, W ′
t, W ′′
t are uncorrelated Brownian motions. Well-posedness is ensured by Lipschitz
continuity of the drift terms (Appendix B).
3.2
Modules as Condensates of Coherent Entropy
In the RSVP framework, a semantic module is a localized condensate of entropy, defined
over an open set U ⊆M. Formally, a module M = (F, Σ, D, ϕ) corresponds to a section
of a sheaf F over U, with ϕ : Σ →S mapping semantic annotations to RSVP fields
restricted to U. The scalar field Φ|U encodes the module's coherence, ⃗v|U directs its
dependencies, and S|U quantifies its uncertainty.
For example, a module implementing a neural network layer may have:
• F: Hashes of weight update functions.
• Σ: Type annotations for sparsity constraints.
• D: Dependencies on data preprocessing modules.
• ϕ: Mapping to a Φ-field optimizing sparsity, with low S.
Modules interact via morphisms in the category C, aligning their RSVP fields to
minimize entropy.
4

3.3
Code as Structured Entropic Flow
Code is modeled as a flow of entropic states within the RSVP plenum. A function f ∈F
is a morphism f : Σ1 →Σ2, inducing a transformation of the Φ-field:
Φf(x, t) = Φ1(x, t) +
∫t
0 ⃗vf(τ) · ∇Φ1(x, τ) dτ,
where ⃗vf is the inference flow induced by f. The entropy field S evolves to reflect
computational cost, with merges minimizing S across modules. This reframes code as a
dynamic process, not a static text artifact, enabling semantic composition.
4
Category-Theoretic Infrastructure
4.1
Semantic Modules as Objects in a Fibred Category
The category C of semantic modules is fibered over a base category T of theoretical
domains (e.g., RSVP, SIT, CoM). Objects are modules M = (F, Σ, D, ϕ), with morphisms
f = (fF, fΣ, fD, Ψ) preserving entropy flows (Appendix A). The fibration π : C →T
enables context-aware translations, such as mapping an RSVP module to an SIT context
via pullback functors.
4.2
Morphisms, Functors, and Contextual Roles
Morphisms in C are type-safe transformations, ensuring semantic coherence. For example,
a morphism f : M1 →M2 may refactor a module's functions (fF) while preserving its
RSVP field alignment (Ψ). Functors F : C →C model higher-order transformations,
such as semantic versioning or dependency resolution. Contextual roles are encoded via
natural transformations η : F →G, aligning modules across domains.
4.3
Groupoids for Forks, Lineage, and Reparameterization
Versioning is modeled by groupoids GM, with objects as module versions Mv and mor-
phisms as semantic-preserving isomorphisms. A functor V : GM →C tracks lineage,
enabling forks to be reconciled via homotopy colimits. Reparameterization (e.g., renam-
ing functions) is an isomorphism in GM, preserving entropy flows.
5
Semantic Merge Operator
5.1
Formal Definition of µ : M1 × M2 99K M
The semantic merge operator µ resolves conflicts between modules M1, M2 ∈F(U1), F(U2)
over a semantic base space X, producing a global module M ∈F(U1 ∪U2). For modules
defined on overlapping regions U12 = U1 ∩U2, the merge condition checks the difference:
δ = M1|U12 −M2|U12.
If δ = 0, a trivial merge exists. Otherwise, µ lifts the local data to a global section
using obstruction theory.
The operator is defined as:
5

µ(M1, M2) =



M
if Ext1(LM, TM) = 0,
Fail(ω)
if ω ∈Ext1(LM, TM) ̸= 0,
where LM and TM are the cotangent and tangent complexes of the merged module
M.
5.2
Failure Modes and Obstruction Interpretation
Non-zero obstructions ω ∈Ext1 indicate semantic incompatibilities, such as conflicting
Φ-fields or misaligned ⃗v-flows. Higher obstructions Extn (for n ≥2) reflect multi-way
coherence failures, interpreted as topological defects in the RSVP plenum.
5.3
RSVP Interpretation of Merge: Entropy Field Alignment
In RSVP terms, µ aligns local fields Φ1,⃗v1, S1 and Φ2,⃗v2, S2 into a global field Φ,⃗v, S,
minimizing:
δS
δΦ|U12 = 0.
This ensures smooth entropy transitions, with µ acting as a field-theoretic synthesizer.
A
Categorical Infrastructure of Modules
A.1
A.1 Category of Semantic Modules
The category C of semantic modules is fibered over T , with objects M = (F, Σ, D, ϕ),
where:
1. F: Finite set of function hashes.
2. Σ: Semantic type annotations.
3. D: Dependency graph.
4. ϕ : Σ →S, mapping to RSVP fields (Φ,⃗v, S).
A.2
A.2 Morphisms in C
Morphisms f = (fF, fΣ, fD, Ψ) satisfy ϕ2 ◦fΣ = Ψ ◦ϕ1, preserving RSVP dynamics.
A.3
A.3 Fibered Structure over T
The fibration π : C →T supports pullback functors g∗: π−1(T2) →π−1(T1).
A.4
A.4 Symmetric Monoidal Structure
The structure (C, ⊗, I) defines:
M1 ⊗M2 = (F1 ∪F2, Σ1 × Σ2, D1 ⊔D2, ϕ1 ⊕ϕ2),
with Φ(x, y) = Φ1(x) ⊕Φ2(y).
6

A.5
A.5 Functorial Lineage and Versioning
Groupoids GM and functors V : GM →C track versions and forks.
A.6
A.6 Homotopy Colimit Merge Operator
The merge µ(D) = hocolimID aligns RSVP fields if obstructions vanish.
A.7
A.7 RSVP Interpretation
Modules are entropy packets, morphisms preserve flows, and µ synthesizes global fields.
B
Haskell Type Definitions and Semantic DSL
This appendix provides a Haskell implementation of semantic modules, using GADTs
and type families to enforce semantic constraints.
{-# LANGUAGE GADTs, TypeFamilies , DataKinds #-}
data SemanticTag = RSVP | SIT | CoM | Custom String
data Contributor = Contributor
{ name :: String
, pubKey :: String
}
data Function (a :: SemanticTag) where
EntropyFlow :: String -> Function 'RSVP
MemoryCurve :: String -> Function 'SIT
CustomFunc
:: String -> Function ('Custom s)
data Module (a :: SemanticTag) = Module
{ moduleName
:: String
, functions
:: [Function a]
, dependencies :: [Module a]
, semantics
:: SemanticTag
}
type SemanticGraph = [(Module a, Module a)]
semanticMerge :: Module a -> Module a -> Either String (Module a)
semanticMerge m1 m2 = if semantics m1 == semantics m2
then Right $ Module
{ moduleName = moduleName m1 ++ "_merged_" ++ moduleName m2
, functions = functions m1 ++ functions m2
, dependencies = dependencies m1 ++ dependencies m2
, semantics = semantics m1
}
else Left "Incompatible␣semantic␣tags"
7

The code defines modules with type-level semantics, enabling type-safe merges and
dependency tracking, aligned with RSVP's entropy flows.
References
[1] F. W. Lawvere and S. H. Schanuel, Conceptual Mathematics: A First Introduction to
Categories, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[2] S. Mac Lane, Categories for the Working Mathematician, 2nd ed., Springer, 2013.
[3] L. Illusie, Complexe Cotangent et Déformations I, Springer, 1971.
[4] J. Lurie, Higher Topos Theory, Princeton University Press, 2009.
[5] B. Milewski, Category Theory for Programmers, Blurb, 2019.
8

