Semantic Infrastructure: Entropy-Respecting
Computation in a Modular Universe
August 2025
Abstract
This monograph proposes a foundational framework for semantic modular com-
putation grounded in the principles of the Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum (RSVP)
theory, category theory, and sheaf-theoretic structure. Moving beyond file-based
version control systems like GitHub, we define a symmetric monoidal ∞-category
of semantic modules, equipped with a homotopy-colimit-based merge operator that
resolves computational and conceptual divergences through higher coherence.
Each semantic module is modeled as an entropy-respecting construct, encoding
functions, theories, and transformations as type-safe, sheaf-gluable, and obstruction-
aware structures. We introduce a formal merge operator derived from obstruction
theory, cotangent complexes, and mapping stacks, capable of resolving multi-way
semantic merges across divergent forks. The system integrates deeply with RSVP
field logic, treating code and concept as flows within a plenum of semantic energy.
We propose implementations in Haskell using dependent types, lens-based traver-
sals, and type-indexed graphs, along with potential extensions to blockchain-based
identity tracking, Docker-integrated module deployment, and a latent space knowl-
edge graph for semantic traversal.
This monograph provides the formal infrastructure for a new kind of open,
modular, intelligent computation—where meaning composes, entropy flows, and
semantic structure becomes executable.
1

1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Modern software development platforms, such as GitHub, are constrained by fundamental
limitations that obstruct meaningful collaboration. Repositories rely on symbolic names-
paces, lacking semantic grounding, which leads to collisions and misaligned contexts.
Version control prioritizes syntactic changes over conceptual coherence, with line-based
diffs failing to capture the intent of code. Merges resolve textual conflicts without regard
for semantic relationships, and forks create fragmented branches without mechanisms to
reconcile divergent interpretations. These issues reflect a misalignment between compu-
tational infrastructure and the semantic, entropy-driven nature of collaboration. This
monograph proposes a semantic, compositional, entropy-respecting framework that rede-
fines computation as structured flows of meaning, grounded in mathematical physics and
category theory.
1.2
Philosophical Foundations
Drawing from the Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum (RSVP) theory, we model compu-
tation as dynamic interactions of scalar coherence fields Φ, vector inference flows ⃗v, and
entropy fields S over a spacetime manifold M = R × R3. Computational modules are lo-
calized condensates of semantic energy, integrated through thermodynamic, categorical,
and topological consistency. The framework leverages:
• Category Theory: For compositional modularity and semantic transformations [1].
• Sheaf Theory: For local-to-global consistency in merges [2].
• Obstruction Theory: To quantify mergeability via cotangent complexes [3].
• Homotopy Theory: For higher coherence in multi-way merges [4].
• Haskell and Type Theory: For practical implementation [5].
This monograph constructs a formal system to replace syntactic version control with a
semantic infrastructure for executable meaning.
2
From Source Control to Semantic Computation
2.1
The GitHub Illusion: Permissions Masquerading as Names-
pace
The current global infrastructure for collaborative coding—centered around platforms like
GitHub, GitLab, and Bitbucket—presents itself as a coherent namespace for projects,
contributors, and computational modules. This appearance is deceptive. Beneath its
clean user interface and social coding veneer, GitHub operates as a permissioned layer
over traditional file systems and symbolic version control. Its structure is not ontological
but operational: it organizes who can read, write, and execute, not what things are or
how they relate.
GitHub repositories are little more than glorified ~/user/project directories with
cosmetic metadata. Branches simulate multiplicity but are essentially temporal forks
2

of file state. The underlying Git system, while ingenious in its content-based commit
hashing and tree structure, still anchors meaning to syntax: merge conflicts are lines in
a file, not semantic contradictions. There is no awareness of function, type, theory, or
ontology. A function called transform() in two branches may represent wildly different
concepts, yet GitHub cannot tell. Names collide. Meaning does not.
Worse still, forking creates epistemic fragmentation. Semantic divergence—two peo-
ple exploring conceptually related but non-equivalent evolutions of a model—becomes a
structural break, rather than a traceable, composable lineage. The illusion of version
control is that it preserves change, when in fact it buries intent beneath syntax.
2.2
Beyond Line Diffs: Why Semantic Meaning Doesn't Com-
pose in Git
The heart of the problem is that Git and GitHub were not designed to handle semantic
modules. They were built to track files and textual edits, not functions, proofs, type
transformations, or field-theoretic roles. As a result, even modestly complex systems of
co-evolving components become brittle, merge-prone, and semantically opaque.
Consider three contributors modifying different aspects of a codebase: one improves
a mathematical model, another optimizes the data pipeline, and a third refactors type
declarations for clarity.
In Git, these become three sets of file-level diffs, potentially
colliding in lines or structure. There is no global view of which semantic modules were
affected, what dependencies were touched, or how their conceptual alignment changed.
This is not merely a usability issue. It is a representational error. The assumption
that text equals meaning is false. It fails especially for scientific computing, artificial
intelligence, theory-building, and systems where correctness is determined by more than
syntactic compatibility.
Merges in Git fail not because humans cannot reason about
them, but because Git has no internal theory of what is being merged.
2.3
Toward Modular Entropy: Computation as Structured Co-
herence
To move beyond this collapse of meaning, we propose a new approach: semantic modular
computation. This approach views each computational module not as a file or blob of
text, but as a structured field of coherent roles, transformations, and entropic flows. It
takes seriously the idea that code, data, and theory are not merely stored, but expressed.
Each module in this framework is treated as a condensate of meaning: a packet
of structured entropy, bounded by its dependencies, roles, and transformations. These
modules live not in a file system, but in a semantic space indexed by type, function, and
ontological role. They are composed not by appending lines or concatenating diffs, but
by merging structured flows through higher categorical constructions.
This shift requires a fundamentally different substrate. Instead of Git branches, we
need sheaf-theoretic contexts. Instead of line diffs, we need obstruction classes and derived
stacks. Instead of symbolic names like main and dev, we need hash-addressed entropy
modules with traceable morphisms between semantic states.
Semantic computation is not just a change in tooling; it is a change in worldview.
It treats computation as a thermodynamic, categorical, and epistemic process. In the
chapters that follow, we will construct the infrastructure needed to make this real: sym-
3

metric monoidal categories of semantic modules, merge operators derived from homotopy
colimits, and a practical encoding of these ideas in type-safe languages like Haskell.
But we begin here, with a simple insight: GitHub is not a namespace. It is a container.
And what we need is not more containers, but a language for meaning that composes.
3
RSVP Theory and Modular Fields
3.1
Scalar (Φ), Vector (⃗v), and Entropy (S) Fields
The Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum (RSVP) theory models computation as dynamic
interactions of scalar coherence fields Φ, vector inference flows ⃗v, and entropy fields S
over a spacetime manifold M = R × R3 with Minkowski metric gµν = diag(−1, 1, 1, 1).
The fields evolve via coupled Itô stochastic differential equations:
dΦt = [∇· (D∇Φt) −⃗vt · ∇Φt + λSt] dt + σΦdWt,
d⃗vt = [−∇St + γΦt⃗vt] dt + σvdW ′
t,
dSt =
[
δ∇· ⃗vt −ηS2
t
]
dt + σSdW ′′
t ,
where D, λ, γ, δ, η, σΦ, σv, σS are parameters, and Wt, W ′
t, W ′′
t are uncorrelated
Brownian motions. Well-posedness is ensured by Lipschitz continuity (Appendix B).
3.2
Modules as Condensates of Coherent Entropy
A semantic module M = (F, Σ, D, ϕ) is a section of a sheaf F over an open set U ⊆M,
with ϕ : Σ →S mapping to RSVP fields restricted to U. The fields Φ|U, ⃗v|U, and S|U
encode coherence, dependencies, and uncertainty, respectively.
3.3
Code as Structured Entropic Flow
Code is a flow of entropic states, with a function f ∈F inducing:
Φf(x, t) = Φ1(x, t) +
∫t
0 ⃗vf(τ) · ∇Φ1(x, τ) dτ.
Merges minimize S across modules, reframing code as a dynamic process.
4
Category-Theoretic Infrastructure
4.1
Semantic Modules as Objects in a Fibred Category
The category C of semantic modules is fibered over T , with objects M = (F, Σ, D, ϕ) and
morphisms preserving entropy flows (Appendix A).
4.2
Morphisms, Functors, and Contextual Roles
Morphisms f = (fF, fΣ, fD, Ψ) ensure semantic coherence, with functors modeling ver-
sioning and contextual roles via natural transformations.
4

4.3
Groupoids for Forks, Lineage, and Reparameterization
Version groupoids GM and functors V : GM →C track forks and equivalences.
5
Semantic Merge Operator
5.1
Formal Definition of µ : M1 × M2 99K M
The merge operator µ produces M ∈F(U1 ∪U2) from M1, M2 ∈F(U1), F(U2), checking:
δ = M1|U12 −M2|U12,
and defining:
µ(M1, M2) =



M
if Ext1(LM, TM) = 0,
Fail(ω)
if ω ∈Ext1(LM, TM) ̸= 0.
5.2
Failure Modes and Obstruction Interpretation
Non-zero ω indicates semantic conflicts, with higher Extn reflecting multi-way failures.
5.3
RSVP Interpretation of Merge: Entropy Field Alignment
The operator µ aligns Φ1,⃗v1, S1 and Φ2,⃗v2, S2, minimizing δS
δΦ|U12 = 0.
6
Multi-Way Merge via Homotopy Colimit
6.1
Motivation for Multi-Way Semantic Composition
Pairwise merges are insuﬀicient for complex systems with multiple divergent forks, such as
collaborative AI model development. Multi-way merges reconcile simultaneous changes
across overlapping semantic domains, analogous to tiling entropy fields in the RSVP
plenum.
6.2
Diagrams of Modules as ∞-Categorical Objects
A diagram D : I →C represents a collection of modules {Mi}i∈I, where I is a small
indexing category encoding fork relationships. Objects in I are forks, and morphisms are
alignment constraints (e.g., semantic equivalences). In an ∞-categorical context, D is a
functor to the ∞-category C, preserving higher homotopies.
6.3
Constructing the Homotopy Colimit
The homotopy colimit hocolimID is the universal object receiving compatible morphisms
from {Mi}, defined via the realization of a simplicial object:
hocolimID = |N•(I) ⊗D| ,
where N•(I) is the nerve of I. This can be computed using a two-sided bar construc-
tion, ensuring higher coherence across forks.
5

6.4
RSVP Interpretation
Multi-way merges tile entropy fields Φi : Ui →Y into a global field Φ : ∪
i Ui →Y.
Compatibility requires:
δS
δΦ|Ui∩Uj = 0,
∀i, j ∈I,
with failures indicating topological defects (e.g., misaligned ⃗vi).
6.5
Computational Implementation Strategy
In Haskell, diagrams are encoded using indexed types:
data Diagram (a :: SemanticTag) = Diagram
{ nodes :: [Module a]
, edges :: [(Int, Int, Morphism a)]
}
hocolim :: Diagram a -> Either String (Module a)
hocolim d = -- Implementation of homotopy colimit
Merge logs track homotopies, ensuring auditable semantic reconciliation.
7
RSVP Entropy Topology and Tiling
7.1
Tensor Fields in the RSVP Plenum
RSVP modules form tensor fields over product manifolds U1×· · ·×Un, with Φ(x1, . . . , xn) =
⊕
i Φi(xi). Interactions between Φ, ⃗v, and S are governed by the SDEs in Chapter 2.
7.2
Field-Theoretic Tiling of Semantic Space
Modules are patches in an entropy-coherent atlas, glued via RSVP-compatible overlaps:
Φi|Ui∩Uj ∼Φj|Ui∩Uj.
This ensures topological continuity across semantic domains.
7.3
Defects, Discontinuities, and Merge Obstructions
Non-zero Extn(LM, TM) correspond to singularities, analogous to cosmic strings or do-
main walls in the RSVP plenum.
7.4
Multi-Scale Merging and Layered Composability
Nested sheaves support layered entropy flows, enabling modularity across resolutions
(e.g., function to system).
6

8
Latent Space Embedding and Knowledge Graphs
8.1
Embedding Semantic Modules
A functor Φ : M →Rn embeds modules into a latent space, preserving RSVP metrics
(e.g., entropy gradients). The metric is:
dΦ(M1, M2) = ∥Φ(M1) −Φ(M2)∥.
8.2
Graph Traversal and Conceptual Similarity
A quiver Q with vertices as modules and edges as morphisms supports semantic search
via Gromov-Wasserstein distances.
8.3
Interpretable Visualizations
Quiver diagrams with latent overlays visualize Φ-field flows, navigable via homotopy-
aware paths.
9
Deployment Architecture
9.1
Overview of Technical Requirements
The infrastructure requires distributed graph storage, decentralized identity, and merge-
aware containerization.
9.2
Blockchain-Backed Semantic Versioning
Modules are stored with verifiable credentials, with forks tracked via consensus graphs.
9.3
Kubernetes and Docker Integration
Modules are packaged as containers with semantic hashes, deployed via Kubernetes with
sheaf-structured service graphs.
9.4
Replacement for GitHub/Hugging Face
A registry indexes modules by morphisms and types, enabling semantic composition.
10
What It Means to Compose Meaning
10.1
Beyond Files: Code as Epistemic Structure
Files are incidental; meaning is a distributed coherence field, with entropy as a compu-
tational quantity.
7

10.2
Semantic Modularity and Cognitive Systems
Modules are cognitive fragments, with forking as divergent attention and merging as
belief unification.
10.3
Computability of Meaning
Merging meanings requires aligning RSVP fields, toward an ontology of executable se-
mantics.
A
Categorical Infrastructure of Modules
A.1
A.1 Category of Semantic Modules
Objects M = (F, Σ, D, ϕ), with ϕ : Σ →S mapping to RSVP fields.
A.2
A.2 Morphisms in C
Morphisms f = (fF, fΣ, fD, Ψ) satisfy ϕ2 ◦fΣ = Ψ ◦ϕ1.
A.3
A.3 Fibered Structure over T
Fibration π : C →T supports pullback functors.
A.4
A.4 Symmetric Monoidal Structure
Defines M1 ⊗M2 and I, with Φ(x, y) = Φ1(x) ⊕Φ2(y).
A.5
A.5 Functorial Lineage and Versioning
Groupoids GM track versions.
A.6
A.6 Homotopy Colimit Merge Operator
Merge µ(D) = hocolimID aligns RSVP fields.
A.7
A.7 RSVP Interpretation
Modules are entropy packets, morphisms preserve flows, µ synthesizes fields.
B
Haskell Type Definitions and Semantic DSL
{-# LANGUAGE GADTs, TypeFamilies , DataKinds #-}
data SemanticTag = RSVP | SIT | CoM | Custom String
data Contributor = Contributor
{ name :: String
8

, pubKey :: String
}
data Function (a :: SemanticTag) where
EntropyFlow :: String -> Function 'RSVP
MemoryCurve :: String -> Function 'SIT
CustomFunc
:: String -> Function ('Custom s)
data Module (a :: SemanticTag) = Module
{ moduleName
:: String
, functions
:: [Function a]
, dependencies :: [Module a]
, semantics
:: SemanticTag
}
type SemanticGraph = [(Module a, Module a)]
semanticMerge :: Module a -> Module a -> Either String (Module a)
semanticMerge m1 m2 = if semantics m1 == semantics m2
then Right $ Module
{ moduleName = moduleName m1 ++ "_merged_" ++ moduleName m2
, functions = functions m1 ++ functions m2
, dependencies = dependencies m1 ++ dependencies m2
, semantics = semantics m1
}
else Left "Incompatible␣semantic␣tags"
References
[1] F. W. Lawvere and S. H. Schanuel, Conceptual Mathematics: A First Introduction to
Categories, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[2] S. Mac Lane, Categories for the Working Mathematician, 2nd ed., Springer, 2013.
[3] L. Illusie, Complexe Cotangent et Déformations I, Springer, 1971.
[4] J. Lurie, Higher Topos Theory, Princeton University Press, 2009.
[5] B. Milewski, Category Theory for Programmers, Blurb, 2019.
9

