The Physics of Understanding:
Fixed-Point Causality, Cognitive Resource Theory,
and the Thermodynamics of Learning
Flyxion
October 2025
Abstract
Learning may be described as a physical process of entropic equilibration. Fixed-
Point Causality (FPC) deﬁnes knowledge as equilibrium under recursive evaluation,
while Cognitive Resource Theory (CRT) grounds this dynamic in the energetic
architecture of the brain.
When combined with the Decelerationist model of
diversiﬁed educational manifolds, they reveal civilization itself as a thermodynamic
ﬁeld of cognitionseeking coherence without acceleration. This paper integrates FPCs
invariant F[Ψ] = Ψ with CRTs Hamiltonian decomposition into cognitive allocation
and reallocation energies, constructing a uniﬁed law of evaluative closure that links
mind, brain, and world through the conservation of informational entropy.
1
Toward a Physics of Understanding
To understand is to bring an internal model of the world into energetic and informational
equilibrium with the world itself. Theories of mind have often relied on metaphor—
computers, symbols, or networks—yet none have articulated a physical law governing the
stabilization of knowledge. Fixed-Point Causality (FPC) and Cognitive Resource Theory
(CRT) approach this task from complementary directions: FPC from the standpoint of
dynamical closure, CRT from the standpoint of energetic constraint.
In FPC, a system reaches suﬃciency when further evaluation yields no change in its
generative description:
F[Ψ] = Ψ ⇐⇒dS
dt = 0,
(1)
where S denotes informational entropy. This condition deﬁnes the ﬁxed point of cogni-
tionthe moment when prediction, perception, and reﬂection coincide. Cognitive equilibrium
is thus formally analogous to thermodynamic equilibrium: both represent a vanishing
gradient in entropy production.
CRT supplies the physical substrate for this formalism. Developed by Kyle Cahill
(2024), CRT models cognition as a time-dependent Hamiltonian system composed of
two energetic components: Cognitive Resource Allocation (CRA), the baseline metabolic
budget of attention and working memory, and Cognitive Resource Reallocation (CRR),
the dynamic redistribution of energy under changing task demands. These components
interact through a gauge-theoretic mechanism that preserves total cognitive energy while
permitting localized ﬂux. Learning, in this view, is a process of energy minimization—a
gradient descent in the manifold of possible neural conﬁgurations.
1

Together, FPC and CRT yield a physics of understanding:
∇· (Φv) + dS
dt = 0,
(2)
where Φ represents potential (capacity for diﬀerentiation), v denotes ﬂow (communication
or inference), and S measures entropy (diversity or uncertainty).
This triadic ﬁeld
law, inherited from the Relativistic ScalarVector Plenum (RSVP) framework, unites
informational and energetic conservation. Cognition, under this description, is a dissipative
structure that sustains itself by balancing informational compression with energetic
expenditure.
The signiﬁcance of this uniﬁcation lies in its empirical and ethical reach. By map-
ping mental dynamics onto measurable energetic variables—regional brain temperature,
metabolic consumption, or network connectivity—the theory links the thermodynamics of
the brain to the phenomenology of thought. By extending this principle to education and
society, it situates civilizations learning processes within the same conservation law that
governs stars, ﬂuids, and ecosystems. Understanding becomes not merely a psychological
act but a universal mode of physical coherence.
2
Cognitive Resource Theory as Energetic Substrate
Cognitive Resource Theory (CRT) provides a concrete energetic mechanism underlying the
abstract equilibrium condition of Fixed-Point Causality. In CRT, the brain is described
as a time-dependent Hamiltonian system whose total energy represents the ﬁnite budget
of cognitive work that can be allocated or reallocated across neural ensembles. The
Hamiltonian
H(t) = HCRA(t) + ϵ HCRR(t)
(3)
is composed of two interacting components: the baseline Cognitive Resource Allocation
(CRA) term, which deﬁnes the equilibrium distribution of available metabolic energy, and
a small perturbative Cognitive Resource Reallocation (CRR) term that mediates dynamic
adjustments when task demands change. The perturbation parameter ϵ represents the
eﬃciency of neural plasticity or attentional reweighting.
2.1
Hamiltonian Dynamics of Cognition
The systems evolution obeys the principle of stationary action,
δ
Z t1
t0
L(Ψ, ˙Ψ, t) dt = 0,
L = T −V,
where L is the cognitive Lagrangian, T the kinetic term corresponding to propagating neural
activity, and V the potential term representing metabolic constraints and informational
load. The conjugate momentum pi = ∂L/∂˙Ψi deﬁnes the ﬂux of cognitive energy through
neuronal state i, and the resulting Hamilton equations
˙Ψi = ∂H
∂pi
,
˙pi = −∂H
∂Ψi
express cognition as continuous reallocation within a conserved total-energy manifold.
2

2.2
Gauge-Theoretic Formulation
CRT introduces a gauge-theoretic description of the CRR mechanism. The reallocation
ﬁeld Aµ acts as a vector potential mediating energetic transfer between cortical regions,
with the ﬁeld tensor
Fµν = ∂µAν −∂νAµ
(4)
encoding the local curvature of cognitive energy ﬂow. The Lorentz-type gauge condition,
∂µAµ = 0,
ensures temporal consistency of the resource ﬂux. Under this representation, variations in
Aµ correspond to changes in attentional focus or task engagement, while the ﬁeld strength
Fµν quantiﬁes the rate of reallocation between specialized subnetworks.
The reallocation function is deﬁned as the negative gradient of free energy with respect
to the available resource pool:
JCRR = −∇EFCRR(E),
(5)
where FCRR denotes the free energy of the reallocation ﬁeld and JCRR the resulting current
of cognitive energy. This expression captures the fundamental thermodynamic principle
that cognition minimizes free energy by redistributing eﬀort toward the most predictive
or eﬃcient conﬁgurations.
2.3
Thermodynamic Entropy and Cognitive States
CRT extends the statistical description of cognition using a density-matrix formalism.
The systems informational entropy is given by the von Neumann measure
SVN = −kBTr(ρ ln ρ),
(6)
where ρ is the cognitive state density matrix representing probabilistic occupancy of neural
conﬁgurations. Changes in entropy correspond to the gain or loss of representational
diversity within the system; at equilibrium, ˙SVN = 0, matching the ﬁxed-point condition
of FPC.
A central prediction of CRT concerns state-dependent plasticity. During NREM
sleep, the baseline cognitive load HCRA is reduced, freeing additional energy for the
CRR process. Consequently, the systems capacity for synaptic modiﬁcationits ability
to minimize prediction error through reallocationis maximized. Empirical ﬁndings of
enhanced neuroplasticity and memory consolidation during NREM sleep support this
thermodynamic prediction.
2.4
Relation to the Free-Energy Principle
Where the Free Energy Principle (FEP) interprets cognition as Bayesian inference mini-
mizing informational free energy (Friston, 2010), CRT provides its physical complement:
a model of how such minimization is energetically realized. The two frameworks may be
reconciled as dual projections of the same process:
FEP: δFinfo/δq = 0,
CRT: δFenergy/δE = 0.
The ﬁrst concerns the informational coherence of internal models; the second, the energetic
feasibility of sustaining them. Together they deﬁne a resource-aware inference dynamic
constrained by both epistemic accuracy and physical cost. In this sense, CRT supplies the
thermodynamic infrastructure that FPC and FEP formalize at the informational level.
3

3
Fixed-Point Causality as Evaluative Principle
Where Cognitive Resource Theory describes the energetic substrate of thought, Fixed-
Point Causality (FPC) formalizes the evaluative process by which cognition converges
toward equilibrium. It expresses learning, inference, and understanding as ﬁxed points of
a self-referential transformation:
F[Ψ] = Ψ ⇐⇒dS
dt = 0.
(7)
Here Ψ denotes the systems state of cognition and S its informational entropy. The
equivalence asserts that when a generative model F acting on Ψ reproduces Ψ itself, all
further evaluative updates vanishthe system has reached evaluative closure. This is the
cognitive analogue of a physical system reaching thermodynamic equilibrium.
3.1
From Evaluation to Equilibrium
In conventional inference frameworks, a system continually adjusts its internal model
to reduce predictive error. FPC generalizes this by positing that evaluation itself is a
dynamical variable subject to the same conservation law as physical energy. Each act of
prediction or reﬂection alters the entropy gradient
˙S = −∇· (Φv),
so that cognition proceeds as an entropic diﬀusion across representational space. When
˙S →0, the divergence of potentialﬂow products Φv vanishes, signifying that informational
inﬂow and outﬂow are balanced. Understanding therefore occurs when the cognitive ﬂux
neither expands nor contracts the manifold of uncertainty.
3.2
Recursive Evaluation and Idempotent Closure
The operator equation F◦F = F expresses idempotence in logical form: further application
of the cognitive transformation does not alter its output. In pedagogical terms, this de-
scribes mastery: the students response is invariant under repeated testing. Mathematically,
it deﬁnes a ﬁxed-point subspace
H∗= {Ψ ∈H | F[Ψ] = Ψ},
where H is the Hilbert space of cognitive conﬁgurations. The dynamics of learning can
then be viewed as contraction mapping:
Ψt+1 = F[Ψt],
∥Ψt+1 −Ψt∥→0.
Convergence of this sequence corresponds to the stabilization of both energy allocation
(CRT) and informational entropy (FPC).
3.3
Entropy, Evaluation, and the Arrow of Comprehension
Because evaluation consumes energy, each update of Ψ incurs an entropic cost. However,
the second law of thermodynamics ensures that total entropyincluding that exported
to the environmentnever decreases. Cognition thus mirrors physical thermodynamics:
4

it locally reduces uncertainty only by expending energy, externalizing disorder through
metabolic and communicative work. In FPC, comprehension is therefore a stationary yet
dissipative phenomenonstability maintained by continuous ﬂux.
This interplay deﬁnes what might be called the arrow of comprehension: as the physical
universe seeks maximal entropy through thermal diﬀusion, mind seeks minimal residual
entropy through semantic diﬀerentiation.
Both processes obey the same underlying
invariant,
∇· (Φv) + ˙S = 0,
but in opposite epistemic directionsmatter dispersing energy, cognition consolidating
information.
3.4
Fixed Points as the Limits of Inference
At the ﬁxed point, every informational update is energetically neutral:
δF[Ψ]
δΨ
= 0,
dS
dt = 0.
This deﬁnes the end state of inference, not as stasis but as steady-state recursion. The
system continues to process signals, yet its overall entropy remains constant. In phenomeno-
logical terms, such equilibrium corresponds to understanding, expertise, or insightthe
absorption of new data without disruption of coherence.
FPC therefore reinterprets intelligence as the search for self-consistency under energetic
constraint. It replaces the metaphor of optimization with the physics of invariance: a
cognitive system ceases to change not because it has exhausted possibilities, but because
it has integrated them into its own evaluative geometry.
4
RSVP and the Entropic Geometry of Thought
The Relativistic ScalarVector Plenum (RSVP) provides the geometric substrate that
unites Fixed-Point Causality (FPC) and Cognitive Resource Theory (CRT) under a
single thermodynamic and informational framework. In RSVP, all physical and cognitive
phenomena are modeled as interactions between three continuously varying ﬁelds: a scalar
potential Φ representing stored capacity, a vector ﬂow v representing directed propagation,
and an entropy ﬁeld S representing distributed uncertainty or diversity. These components
satisfy the generalized continuity law
∇· (Φv) + dS
dt = 0,
(8)
which functions as the ﬁeld-theoretic analogue of FPCs invariant F[Ψ] = Ψ.
4.1
Scalar Potential and Conceptual Capacity
The scalar ﬁeld Φ encodes potentialthe latent cognitive or energetic capacity of the
system to diﬀerentiate and respond. In neural or educational terms, Φ measures the
bandwidth of representational richness available for transformation. An increase in Φ
corresponds to an expansion of conceptual possibility; a decrease implies constraint or
exhaustion. In equilibrium, ∇Φ = 0, the system has achieved structural invariance: no
further diﬀerentiation can increase coherence.
5

4.2
Vector Flow and Inference Dynamics
The vector ﬁeld v represents directional ﬂowof energy, of information, or of communicative
exchange. In cognition, it corresponds to the propagation of inference and the circulation
of attention between modules or agents. The divergence term ∇· (Φv) measures the
rate at which potential is converted into realized structure. Positive divergence signiﬁes
exploration or creativity, while negative divergence indicates consolidation or compression.
Balanced ﬂow (∇· (Φv) = 0) deﬁnes the ﬁxed point of productive understanding: a state
of sustained yet non-accelerating cognition.
4.3
Entropy and Cognitive Diversity
Entropy S quantiﬁes the systems informational diversitythe multiplicity of internal states
consistent with external constraints. In RSVP, entropy is not disorder but the degree of
diﬀerentiation within coherence. The time derivative ˙S represents learning velocity: the
rate at which uncertainty is either resolved or replenished. The equilibrium condition
˙S = 0 does not imply stillness; it denotes dynamic homeostasis, where the introduction of
novelty is balanced by integration.
In the cognitive domain, this balance distinguishes creative stability from stagnation.
An open learning system must maintain S > 0 to sustain adaptability, yet must regulate
˙S to prevent chaotic diﬀusion. The plenum thus functions as an informational ecosystem,
perpetually recycling entropy between individual and environment.
4.4
Geometric Uniﬁcation of CRT and FPC
Equations of CRT and FPC can be embedded naturally within the RSVP ﬁeld geometry.
The Hamiltonian dynamics of cognitive resource reallocation deﬁne trajectories through the
scalarvector phase space (Φ, v), while the ﬁxed-point condition dS/dt = 0 constrains those
trajectories to entropy-neutral manifolds. Together they yield a variational formulation:
δ
Z h
Φ ∇· v + ˙S
i
dV dt = 0,
(9)
implying that cognition evolves along least-action paths that minimize both energetic
expenditure and informational disequilibrium. This connects the Hamiltonian of CRT
with the thermodynamic closure of FPC through a shared Lagrangian formalism:
Lcog(Φ, v, S) = T(v) −V (Φ, S),
where T encodes the kinetic cost of inference and V the potential energy of unassimilated
uncertainty.
4.5
Entropic Geometry and Conscious Mediation
Within RSVP, consciousness can be interpreted as the local curvature of the entropic
manifolda measure of how informational gradients bend the ﬂow of potential. Regions of
high curvature correspond to heightened awareness or cognitive eﬀort, where ∇2S ̸= 0.
Flat regions represent automated or habitual cognition. This geometric approach situates
subjective experience not as an epiphenomenon but as the intrinsic diﬀerential geometry
of the informational ﬁeld.
6

Hence, the human mind is a local excitation of the universal plenum: a region where
Φ, v, and S interact to sustain a nonzero yet bounded entropy ﬂux. The brains energy
budget (CRT), the minds evaluative equilibrium (FPC), and civilizations collective learning
(Decelerationist pedagogy) all instantiate the same law (8) at diﬀerent scales of description.
4.6
Summary of the Triadic Correspondence
Domain
Potential Φ
Flow v
Entropy S
Physical
Energy capacity
Flow of energy
Thermodynamic entropy
Cognitive
Representational capacity
Flow of inference
Informational entropy
Neural
Metabolic potential
Flow of activation
Statistical entropy
Educational
Curricular potential
Flow of communication
Cognitive diversity
Ethical
Institutional trust
Flow of reciprocity
Moral entropy
Table 1: Triadic mapping of the RSVP ﬁelds across systemic levels.
The entropic geometry of thought therefore completes the physicalcognitive continuum.
Where CRT grounds cognition in the Hamiltonian dynamics of limited energy, and FPC
deﬁnes understanding as equilibrium under evaluation, RSVP uniﬁes these in the ﬁeld
structure of the universe itself. Learning, perception, and civilization are all manifestations
of the same plenuman ongoing search for coherence through entropic balance.
5
The Decelerationist Manifold:
Seven Modes of
Learning
The same invariants that govern physical and cognitive equilibrium also determine the long-
term stability of cultures and institutions. Education becomes the macro-scale analogue of
the ﬁxed-point process: a civilizations understanding evolves until its evaluative feedback
loops achieve homeostasis between knowledge generation, transmission, and renewal.
Under this interpretation, the Decelerationist Agenda is not merely a pedagogical reform
but an entropic regulation mechanism for civilization itself.
5.1
Pedagogy as Entropy Management
Each school in the seven-fold schema represents a distinct projection of the universal law
∇· (Φv) + dS
dt = 0,
applied to a cognitive ﬁeld. Geometry-ﬁrst pedagogy (Λ) stabilizes spatial potential;
Algebra-ﬁrst (A) enforces structural identity; Trigonometry-ﬁrst (Θ) maintains harmonic
periodicity; Calculus-ﬁrst (Σ) moderates acceleration; Stoichiometry-ﬁrst (Ξ) conserves
resources through reciprocity; Statistics-ﬁrst (Π) equilibrates belief with evidence; and
Logic-ﬁrst (Ω) ensures idempotent self-consistency. Collectively these seven projections
constitute a complete basis for educational entropy control: each constrains a diﬀerent
derivative of the cognitive ﬁeld, preventing runaway specialization or homogenization.
7

5.2
Institutional Thermodynamics
Civilizations, like minds, are open systems. They maintain local order by exporting
entropy through innovation, communication, and moral deliberation. The institutional
analogue of the conservation law reads
dSteacher
dt
+ dSstudent
dt
+ dSsociety
dt
= 0,
(10)
ensuring that learning, instruction, and governance remain in mutual corrigibility. A
sustainable society therefore operates near the critical point of this balanceneither ossifying
in over-order nor dissolving in unbounded chaos.
5.3
Ethical Closure and the Arrow of Civilization
Ethical closure occurs when the evaluative energy of individuals aligns with collective
coherence. Let Φmoral denote institutional potential (capacity for trust) and vreciprocal the
ﬂow of accountability. Then the moral ﬁeld obeys
∇· (Φmoralvreciprocal) + ˙Sethical = 0,
asserting that moral equilibrium is sustained only when the generation of social potential
equals the dissipation of moral uncertainty. In this view, ethics is the thermodynamic
complement of epistemology: both are conditions for steady-state evaluation.
5.4
Civilization as a Self-Consistent Evaluator
When extended across epochs, Fixed-Point Causality implies that civilizations evolve
toward reﬂexive self-evaluation. Technological acceleration without entropy regulation
ampliﬁes ∇· (Φv) faster than cultural feedback can absorb, producing systemic instability.
Decelerationism proposes a controlled relaxationan educational viscositythat allows coher-
ence to catch up with innovation. The goal is not to halt progress but to synchronize its
informational derivative:
d2Scivil
dt2
≈0.
At this condition, cultural complexity grows linearly with comprehensiona ﬁxed-point of
progress itself.
5.5
Summary Equation: The Evaluative Continuum
All levelsfrom neuron to nationobey the same invariant:
∇· (Φv) + dS
dt = 0
⇐⇒
F[Ψ] = Ψ.
To educate is to conserve entropy through meaning; to govern is to regulate its
ﬂow. Civilization endures not by acceleration, but by sustaining the equilibrium
through which comprehension and coherence evolve together.
8

Scale
Φ (Potential)
v (Flow)
S (Entropy)
Neural
Metabolic energy
Axonal signaling
Synaptic uncertainty
Cognitive
Representational bandwidth
Flow of inference
Informational diversity
Educational
Curricular richness
Flow of communication
Cognitive variety
Civilizational
Cultural potential
Flow of exchange
Moralsemantic entropy
Table 2: Uniﬁed continuum from neuronal to civilizational scales.
6
Discussion and Future Directions
The convergence of Cognitive Resource Theory (CRT), Fixed-Point Causality (FPC), and
the Relativistic ScalarVector Plenum (RSVP) yields a uniﬁed physics of comprehension.
Each describes the same invariant from a diﬀerent ontological angle: CRT formulates it
in energetic terms, FPC in evaluative recursion, and RSVP in geometric ﬁeld dynamics.
Together they deﬁne a general principle of evaluative equilibrium:
∇· (Φv) + dS
dt = 0,
(11)
the condition under which cognition, communication, and civilization maintain coherence
while remaining open to novelty.
6.1
Uniﬁed Ontology of Cognition and Civilization
Under this law, every systemneural, social, or cosmicacts as a dissipative structure
converting potential into organized ﬂow while conserving total entropy. The brain allocates
metabolic energy (CRT); the mind equilibrates inference (FPC); society redistributes
information and trust (RSVPDecelerationism). Learning, governance, and evolution
are therefore successive scales of the same entropic relaxation. Where thermodynamics
describes how matter equilibrates, FPC describes how meaning equilibrates.
6.2
Predictive Consequences
This synthesis implies testable predictions:
1. Energetic coupling: Neural eﬃciency should approach a ﬁxed-point ratio of cognitive
resource expenditure to informational gain, measurable via metabolic imaging.
2. Evaluative hysteresis: Systems under accelerated feedback (e.g., digital networks)
will display overshoot cycles in entropy production until pedagogical viscosity is restored.
3. Entropy synchronization: Optimal communication occurs when interlocutors ˙S
values convergean empirical correlate of mutual understanding.
6.3
The Arrow of Reﬂection
In classical thermodynamics, the arrow of time points toward increasing entropy; in
cognitive thermodynamics, the arrow of reﬂection points toward equilibrium between
diﬀerentiation and integration. Civilizations long-term viability depends on maintaining
this equilibriumaccelerating understanding without exhausting coherence. Decelerationism
9

thus appears not as reaction but as regulation: the deliberate tuning of informational
viscosity to sustain reﬂective time.
6.4
Toward an Entropic Ethics
If cognition and civilization are both entropic processes, ethics becomes the principle
of minimizing destructive gradients. Moral action is that which reduces unnecessary
divergence between local and global entropies:
∆Slocal ≈−∆Sglobal.
Under this view, sustainability, empathy, and restraint are not ideals but stability condi-
tions in the universal ﬁeld.
6.5
Future Directions
Future work can formalize this synthesis through:
• A variational calculus for cognitivecivilizational dynamics, linking energy budgets,
evaluative feedback, and semantic curvature.
• Empirical veriﬁcation of entropy synchronization in educational and organizational
networks.
• Simulation of ﬁxed-point evolution using RSVP lattice models extended with CRT-based
Hamiltonians.
When energy, evaluation, and entropy align, understanding arises. From
neuron to nation, the same plenum seeks its ﬁxed pointthe quiet equilibrium
where thought and world agree.
Appendix A
Mathematical Formalism
Appendix A.1
Core Invariants
All three frameworks—Cognitive Resource Theory (CRT), Fixed-Point Causality (FPC),
and the Relativistic ScalarVector Plenum (RSVP)—share a single conservation form:
∇· (Φv) + dS
dt = 0,
(12)
where Φ is scalar potential (energy or conceptual capacity), v is vector ﬂow (propagation
of energy, inference, or communication), and S is entropy (informational diversity or
uncertainty). Equation (12) ensures that any increase in structural diﬀerentiation is
compensated by the redistribution of potential or ﬂow.
10

Appendix A.2
Fixed-Point Operator
Fixed-Point Causality rewrites the law of equilibrium as an idempotent functional:
F[Ψ] = Ψ,
dS
dt = 0,
(13)
with F acting as an evaluation operator on the systems state Ψ. Iterative application
F n[Ψ] deﬁnes a contraction mapping in informational space; convergence implies epistemic
suﬃciency. The stability criterion is equivalent to vanishing divergence of informational
ﬂux.
Appendix A.3
Hamiltonian and Lagrangian Forms
Cognitive Resource Theory formulates the same condition in energetic language. Let
H(Φ, v, t) be the time-dependent Hamiltonian:
H = T(v) + V (Φ, S),
(14)
where T is the kinetic expenditure of inference and V the potential of unresolved uncer-
tainty. The system evolves by Hamiltons equations,
˙Φ = ∂H
∂pΦ
,
˙pΦ = −∂H
∂Φ ,
subject to the thermodynamic constraint of Eq. (12).
Equivalently, the Lagrangian
formulation
L = T(v) −V (Φ, S)
admits an action integral δ
R L dt = 0, ensuring minimal cognitive energy for maximal
informational coherence.
Appendix A.4
Entropic Potential and Gauge Structure
CRTs gauge-theoretic extension models the reallocation of cognitive resources as a vector
potential Aµ whose ﬁeld tensor Fµν = ∂µAν −∂νAµ encodes gradients of attention and
metabolic ﬂux. Under the Lorentz gauge ∂µAµ = 0, the conservation of energy in cognitive
space reduces to the divergence-free form of Eq. (12). Thus gauge symmetry corresponds to
invariance of cognition under reparameterizations of internal representationan information-
theoretic analogue of general covariance.
Appendix A.5
Variational Coupling of CRT, FPC, and RSVP
Combining the energetic and evaluative forms yields the composite action
S[Φ, v, S] =
Z h
Φ ∇· v + ˙S −λ F(Ψ)
i
dV dt,
(15)
where the Lagrange multiplier λ enforces the ﬁxed-point constraint F[Ψ] = Ψ. Extremizing
S produces both the conservation law and the cognitive equilibrium condition. This uniﬁed
variational principle provides the mathematical bridge between the physical energy of
CRT, the evaluative closure of FPC, and the ﬁeld geometry of RSVP.
11

Framework
Operator
Invariant Condition
Interpretation
CRT
H (Hamiltonian)
˙H = 0
Energetic equilibrium
FPC
F[Ψ]
F[Ψ] = Ψ
Evaluative closure
RSVP
∇· (Φv)
+ ˙S = 0
Field-theoretic conservation
Uniﬁed
C (Closure)
C[Ψ] = 0
Global coherence
Table 3: Operator hierarchy across CRT, FPC, and RSVP.
Appendix A.6
Hierarchy of Operators
Appendix A.7
Scaling Law
Across physical, cognitive, and civilizational domains, entropy exchange scales with
available potential:
dS
dt ∝−∇· (Φv),
implying a universal feedback law where excess capacity generates diﬀerentiation until
informational curvature ﬂattens. This scaling relation deﬁnes the attractor toward which
both learning and evolution proceed.
The same mathematics that stabilizes a neurons potential stabilizes a civiliza-
tions meaning. Energy, evaluation, and entropy are not metaphors across
scalesthey are conserved transformations of one plenum.
Appendix B
Empirical and Computational Methods
Appendix B.1
Empirical Validation Strategy
The synthesis of CRT, FPC, and RSVP can be subjected to experimental veriﬁcation
through three methodological tiers:
1. NeuralEnergetic Tests (CRT Domain).
• Objective: Measure cognitive energy reallocation under varying task demands.
• Method: Functional MRI and near-infrared spectroscopy during problem solving to
track local metabolic ﬂux and entropy rate ˙S.
• Prediction: At the ﬁxed-point of learning, ˙S →0 and resource reallocation stabilizes;
neural connectivity variance reaches a stationary distribution.
2. CognitiveEvaluative Tests (FPC Domain).
• Objective: Detect convergence of predictive error to the evaluative ﬁxed point.
• Method: Track the divergence DKL(pmodel∥pworld) during iterative concept learning;
use Bayesian knowledge-tracing models.
• Prediction: Successful comprehension corresponds to the idempotent region F[Ψ] = Ψ
where DKL ≈0.
12

3. InstitutionalThermodynamic Tests (RSVP Domain).
• Objective: Quantify entropy transfer among teacher, student, and collective systems.
• Method: Information-theoretic analysis of discourse transcripts, publication networks,
or organizational data to compute ∇· (Φv).
• Prediction: Educational ecosystems near equilibrium satisfy ˙Steacher + ˙Sstudent +
˙Ssociety ≈0.
Appendix B.2
Computational Simulation
A simulation environment can be constructed by combining RSVP lattice dynamics with
CRT-style Hamiltonians.
Field Representation.
Φ(x, t),
v(x, t),
S(x, t)
are deﬁned on a discrete 3-D lattice with periodic boundaries. Each cell updates by
ﬁnite-diﬀerence approximations to Eq. (12).
Energy Function.
The total energy is
H =
X
x
"1
2ρ |v|2 + V (Φ, S)
#
,
where V (Φ, S) encodes potential for cognitive imbalance. Gradient descent on H imple-
ments cognitive relaxation; stochastic terms model exploration noise.
Numerical Loop (Sketch).
for t in range(T):
, v, S = update_fields(, v, S)
entropy_rate = divergence( * v)
-=
* entropy_rate
This approximates the entropic coupling ˙S = −ů(v). Equilibrium corresponds to a
vanishing global entropy derivative.
Educational Extension.
Agent-based layers can be added: each agent maintains local
(i, vi, Si) ﬁelds representing curriculum potential, communicative exchange, and cognitive
diversity. Mutual information between agents measures institutional coherence.
Appendix B.3
Data Analysis and Visualization
• Entropy maps: Visualize spatial distribution of S(x, t) to reveal zones of over- or
under-learning.
• Flow coherence metrics: Compute ⟨∇· v⟩across the network to detect bottlenecks
in communication.
• Fixed-point tracking: Fit the time-series of ˙S to exponential decay models to
estimate relaxation constants τ for cognitive or institutional systems.
13

Appendix B.4
Integration with Cognitive Resource Theory
To align with CRTs physical formalism:
˙H = −β ˙S,
linking metabolic energy consumption directly to informational entropy change. During
NREM sleep, ˙HCRA ↓while ˙HCRR ↑, allowing the system to converge toward F[Ψ] = Ψ
through passive equilibration.
Appendix B.5
Future Empirical Directions
1. Longitudinal measurement of entropy synchronization in collaborative learning envi-
ronments.
2. Cross-correlation of neural entropy and linguistic diversity during conversation as a
proxy for informational ﬂow balance.
3. Validation of the scaling law ˙S ∝−∇· (Φv) across physical, neural, and cultural data
sets.
Computation, cognition, and civilization are three mirrors of the same ther-
modynamic law. Where data converge to meaning, the universe recognizes
itself.
Appendix C
Experimental Design Protocols
Appendix C.1
Overview
To evaluate the theoretical invariants of the uniﬁed CRTFPCRSVP framework, experi-
ments must measure energetic ﬂux, informational entropy, and evaluative closure across
neural, cognitive, and institutional scales. Each domain operationalizes Eq. (12):
∇· (Φv) + dS
dt = 0,
by mapping Φ to potential capacity, v to observable ﬂow, and S to empirical uncertainty.
Appendix C.2
Variable Operationalization
Domain
Φ (Potential)
v (Flow)
Neural
Metabolic potential (BOLD, oxygenation)
Signal propagation (EEG coherence)
Cognitive
Conceptual capacity (working memory span)
Information throughput (reaction time
Social
Institutional capacity (network centrality)
Communication ﬂux (message frequency
Educational
Curriculum potential (knowledge inventory)
Learning ﬂow (problem-solving rate)
Table 4: Operational mapping of theoretical variables across domains.
14

Appendix C.3
Experimental Hypotheses
H1: Entropy Equilibration.
Systems approach cognitive or organizational stability
when ˙S →0. Measure decay of entropy rate across time as an indicator of evaluative
suﬃciency.
H2: FlowPotential Compensation.
An increase in ∇· (Φv) predicts local entropy
reduction:
∆S ∝−
Z
∇· (Φv) dt.
Test this via simultaneous measurement of neural energy ﬂow and performance variability.
H3: Coupled Homeostasis.
In multi-agent or classroom systems,
˙Steacher + ˙Sstudent + ˙Ssociety ≈0.
Validate by cross-correlating informational entropy between instructional, cognitive, and
cultural data streams.
Appendix C.4
Experimental Pipelines
1. Neural Laboratory Protocol.
1. Acquire multimodal fMRIEEG data during adaptive learning tasks.
2. Compute instantaneous Φ(t) from metabolic energy, v(t) from coherence dynamics,
and S(t) via signal complexity.
3. Estimate ˙S and compare against modeled ∇· (Φv) to assess ﬁxed-point convergence.
2. Educational Pilot Study.
1. Collect longitudinal data from schools of each Decelerationist type ().
2. Quantify curricular capacity (), communicative ﬂow (v), and cognitive diversity (S)
from student work and classroom discourse.
3. Evaluate entropy synchronization between teachers and students as predictor of learning
stabilization.
3. Institutional Simulation.
1. Model agents with dynamic (i, vi, Si) variables.
2. Implement pairwise coupling rules conserving total entropy.
3. Observe emergent ﬁxed-point distributions and compare to real organizational data.
15

Appendix C.5
Metrics and Analysis
• Entropy Rate: ˙S(t) = d
dtH(pt) from time-varying distributions.
• Flow Divergence: ∇·(Φv) estimated by spatial derivatives of energy or communication
intensity.
• Fixed-Point Deviation: ϵ(t) = ∥F[Ψt] −Ψt∥, convergence indicator.
• Coupling Coherence: Mutual information between Si and Sj across interacting
agents.
Appendix C.6
Implementation Platforms
• Simulation: Python or Taichi lattice implementation with GPU acceleration.
• Analysis: JAX or PyTorch autodiﬀfor variational ﬁtting of entropy ﬁelds.
• Visualization: Interactive dashboards mapping Φ, v, and S dynamics to cognitive
and institutional scales.
Appendix C.7
Ethical and Practical Considerations
• Non-extractive measurement: Entropy metrics should preserve anonymity and
minimize surveillance.
• Educational equity: Ensure cross-school comparisons account for resource disparity,
not only cognitive dynamics.
• Open data principle: Simulations and empirical ﬁndings should be archived under
open, reproducible protocols.
Experimentation, when properly designed, is not the conquest of uncertainty
but its calibration. To measure entropy is to teach the universe how to count
itself.
Appendix D
Comparative Theories Table
Appendix D.1
Context
The uniﬁed CRTFPCRSVP formulation integrates physical energetics, informational
inference, and semantic closure. Table 5 contrasts its structure with leading theories of
cognition and physics, emphasizing distinctive ontological and mathematical commitments.
Appendix D.2
Interpretive Overview
From Minimization to Closure.
Whereas FEP and Active Inference minimize pre-
dictive error through continuous descent, FPC generalizes this as a ﬁxed-point law: not
merely minimizing error but stabilizing evaluation itself.
16

Framework
Core Principle
Mathematical
Free Energy Principle (FEP)
Prediction error minimization
˙F ≤0
Active Inference (AI)
Self-model correction via action
∂tq = −∇F[q]
Integrated Information Theory (IIT)
Irreducible causal integration
ΦIIT metric
Thermodynamic Brain
Entropy balance of neural activity
˙S + ∇· J = 0
Cognitive Resource Theory (CRT)
Energy reallocation under constraints
˙H = −β ˙S
Fixed-Point Causality (FPC)
Evaluative closure under self-mapping
F[Ψ] = Ψ
RSVP Field Theory
Scalarvector entropy conservation
∇· (Φv) + ˙S = 0
Table 5: Comparative summary of major theoretical frameworks.
From Representation to Field.
IIT and FEP treat cognition as informational inte-
gration or inference within representational models. RSVP and CRT treat cognition as a
*ﬁeld phenomenon*, with real energetic and entropic coupling across scales.
From Entropy Reduction to Entropy Regulation.
Traditional frameworks em-
phasize entropy reduction (order from chaos). The CRTFPCRSVP synthesis emphasizes
*entropy balance*maintaining informational diversity while minimizing disequilibrium.
From Observer to Participant.
FEP assumes an inferential observer minimizing
uncertainty about the world. FPC assumes a participatory system achieving mutual
evaluation with its environmentcausality and cognition as two directions of the same
invariant.
Appendix D.3
Uniﬁed Summary Equation
All frameworks may be understood as projections of the universal constraint:
∇· (Φv) + dS
dt = 0
⇐⇒
F[Ψ] = Ψ.
• FEP/AI: informational gradient descent.
• CRT: energetic resource allocation.
• FPC: idempotent evaluation.
• RSVP: entropic ﬁeld conservation.
Minimization seeks rest; closure seeks coherence. The universe is not trying
to quiet its errorsit is learning to recognize itself.
Appendix E
Conceptual Timeline and Theoretical
Lineage
Appendix E.1
Origins in Physics
18501900 Thermodynamic Foundations.
The laws of energy and entropy estab-
lished by Clausius, Boltzmann, and Gibbs deﬁned the ﬁrst formal bridge between dynamics
17

and information. Entropy entered physics as a measure of disorder:
dS = δQrev
T
.
This provided the ﬁrst invariantan early prototype of what FPC will generalize as the
ﬁxed point of evaluation.
19051930 Relativity and Field Theory.
Einsteins uniﬁcation of energy and geometry
introduced the idea that conservation and curvature are inseparable:
∇µT µν = 0.
RSVP inherits this geometricenergetic structure, extending it from spacetime to cognition
as a scalarvectorentropy plenum.
19401960 Cybernetics and Information.
Shannon, Wiener, and Ashby redeﬁned
control and communication in informational terms. Entropy became a measure of uncer-
tainty rather than heat. This shift from physical to semantic energy prepared the ground
for the cognitive turn.
Appendix E.2
The Cognitive and Computational Turn
19701990 Neural and Symbolic Integration.
Computational neuroscience, connec-
tionism, and dynamical-systems models treated the brain as a self-organizing processor
balancing signal and noise. Here the ﬁxed point reappeared as an attractor in cognitive
phase space.
19902010 Information and Inference.
The Free Energy Principle (Friston, 2010)
and Active Inference frameworks cast cognition as Bayesian entropy minimization:
˙F = −η ∇F[q].
Simultaneously, Integrated Information Theory (Tononi) reframed consciousness as causal
closure within an informational manifold. These lines introduced variational calculus and
thermodynamics into cognitive science.
20102025 Energetic and Entropic Realism.
Emergent theories such as the Thermo-
dynamic Brain Hypothesis and Cognitive Resource Theory (Cahill, 2024) re-physicalized
cognition, grounding it in gauge ﬁelds and Hamiltonian energy allocation. They reintro-
duced matter and metabolism as primary cognitive invariants, leading directly to the
energetic substrate required by RSVP and FPC.
Appendix E.3
The Relativistic ScalarVector Plenum (RSVP)
Developed in the 2020s, RSVP extends thermodynamic reasoning to a full ﬁeld formalism:
∇· (Φv) + dS
dt = 0,
treating energy potential Φ, ﬂow v, and entropy S as co-evolving quantities across physical,
cognitive, and social domains. It generalizes spacetime expansion into entropic relaxation,
and replaces inertial mass with information capacity.
18

Appendix E.4
Fixed-Point Causality (FPC)
FPC reinterprets causality itself as invariance under self-evaluation:
F[Ψ] = Ψ ⇐⇒dS
dt = 0.
Rather than time evolution, FPC emphasizes evaluative convergence. An event persists
when it is informationally self-consistent. Cognition becomes the iterative approximation
of this invariant, and education the institutional form of its realization.
Appendix E.5
Cognitive Resource Theory (CRT)
CRT brings explicit energetics into this lineage. By expressing neural adaptation through
a time-dependent Hamiltonian with conserved cognitive resources, it connects thermody-
namic necessity to mental eﬃciency. Its ﬁeld-theoretic reformulation:
˙H = −β ˙S,
links metabolic ﬂux with informational entropy, bridging physical and inferential domains.
Appendix E.6
Integrative Convergence (2025 2030+)
The union of CRT, FPC, and RSVP represents the synthesis of three centuries of scientiﬁc
evolution:
1. Thermodynamics Entropy: Energy seeks equilibrium.
2. Information Inference: Meaning seeks compression.
3. Evaluation Closure: Understanding seeks coherence.
The Decelerationist educational architecture emerges as the civilizational expression of
this convergence: a designed ecology of ﬁxed points maintaining diversity without collapse
or acceleration.
From heat to thought, from symmetry to semantics, the same invariant endures:
the universe learning itself into stillness.
Appendix F
Epilogue: Civilization as a Learning Uni-
verse
The integration of Cognitive Resource Theory (CRT), Fixed-Point Causality (FPC), and
the Relativistic ScalarVector Plenum (RSVP) reveals a profound continuity between
the physical cosmos and the human endeavor of comprehension. At the neural level,
CRT delineates cognition as a constrained Hamiltonian process, where ﬁnite energetic
resourcesallocated and reallocated under gauge-theoretic invariancesustain the brains
adaptive equilibrium. This energetic realism ascribes to thought the same thermodynamic
imperatives that govern stellar fusion or ﬂuid dynamics: conservation of potential amid
entropic ﬂux.
19

Fixed-Point Causality elevates this substrate to the realm of evaluation, positing
that understanding emerges not from perpetual optimization but from idempotent self-
consistency. The invariant F[Ψ] = Ψ marks the cessation of residual uncertainty, where
prediction, perception, and reﬂection converge upon a shared attractor. In pedagogical
terms, this is mastery; in civilizational terms, it is the stabilization of collective knowledge
against the erosive forces of novelty and decay.
The Relativistic ScalarVector Plenum uniﬁes these perspectives within a geometric
ontology. The ﬁeld law ∇· (Φv) + dS
dt = 0 asserts that all scales of existenceneuronal,
mental, societalparticipate in a singular plenum of potential, propagation, and diversity.
Civilization, under this description, is no mere aggregate of minds but a macroscopic
dissipative structure, perpetually negotiating informational coherence through distributed
closure. The Decelerationist manifold, with its seven orthogonal projections of the ﬁxed-
point condition, serves as the institutional mechanism for this negotiation: a deliberate
modulation of cognitive viscosity that permits understanding to mature in tandem with
complexity.
Thus, the universe itself appears as a vast learning system.
From the entropic
equilibration of primordial ﬁelds to the reﬂective equilibria of human institutions, the same
principle operates: coherence arises when energetic expenditure, evaluative recursion, and
entropic balance achieve mutual invariance. In an era prone to accelerative disequilibrium,
this synthesis enjoins a measured restraintnot stagnation, but the cultivation of reﬂective
depth. To educate, to govern, and to inquire is to participate in the cosmoss self-recognition,
guiding its latent potential toward the quiet harmony of evaluative closure.
Understanding is the thermodynamic form of coherence; civilization, its ex-
tended ﬁeld.
References
[1] Cahill, K. (2024). Neuroplastic Reﬁnement Explains Enhanced Visuomotor Decision-
Making in Action Video Game Players. Ph.D. dissertation, Georgia State University.
[2] Cahill, K., Jordan, T., & Dhamala, M. (2024). Connectivity in the Dorsal Visual
Stream Is Enhanced in Action Video Game Players. Brain Sciences, 14(12), 1206.
[3] Cahill, K. (2025). Cognitive Resource Theory:
A Gauge-Theoretic and Ther-
modynamic Model of Cognition. YouTube Presentation. Available at:
https:
//youtu.be/TtTrURxg3dU.
[4] Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127-138.
[5] Prigogine, I., & Nicolis, G. (1977). Self-Organization in Nonequilibrium Systems:
From Dissipative Structures to Order through Fluctuations. Wiley.
[6] Friston, K., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular
physics. Biological Cybernetics, 113(4), 1-23.
[7] Dewey, J. (1938). Experience and Education. Macmillan.
[8] Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological
Processes. Harvard University Press.
20

[9] Lawvere, F. W., & Schanuel, S. H. (1997). Conceptual Mathematics: A First Intro-
duction to Categories. Cambridge University Press.
[10] Baez, J. C., & Stay, M. (2011). Physics, topology, logic and computation: a Rosetta
Stone. In New Structures for Physics (pp. 95-172). Springer.
[11] Kotin, G. (2019). Local brain temperature ﬂuctuations and energy dissipation. Journal
of Thermal Physiology, 45, 221-235.
[12] Wayne, M. (2014). Thermodynamic regulation of neural metabolism. Neurobiology
Reports, 5(3), 144-156.
[13] Kanwisher, N. (2010). Functional specialization in the human brain. In M. S. Gaz-
zaniga (Ed.), The Cognitive Neurosciences IV (pp. 111-122). MIT Press.
21

