THE  
UNACCOUNTABILITY 
MACHINE

THE  
UNACCOUNTABILITY 
MACHINE
Why Big Systems Make Terrible Decisions -  
and How the World Lost Its Mind
DAN DAVIES

First published in Great Britain in 2024 by 
Profile Books Ltd
29 Cloth Fair
London
ec1a 7jq
www.profilebooks.com
Copyright © Dan Davies, 2024
1  3  5  7  9  10  8  6  4  2 
Typeset in Sabon by MacGuru Ltd
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Clays Ltd, Elcograf S.p.A.
The moral right of the author has been asserted.
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright 
reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in 
any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of 
both the copyright owner and the publisher of this book.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978 1 78816 954 7
eISBN 978 1 78283 925 5

To Tess, Joe, Poppy and Rosie
And also, to the middle managers of the world, the designers 
of spreadsheets and the writers of policies. Your work may be 
prosaic, but you are the ones who shape the world we live in.

Contents
Author's Note
ix
Part One: The Nature of the Crisis
1
Introduction
3
1	 'Something's Up'
9
2	 Stafford Beer
37
3	 Aliens Among Us
63
Intermission: Computing Ponds and Rabbit Holes
87
Part Two: Pathologies of the System
91
4	 How to Psychoanalyse a Non-human Intelligence
93
5	 Cybernetics Without Diagrams
115
Intermission: Decerebrate Cats
137
Part Three: The Blind Spots
139
6	 Economics and How It Got That Way
141
7	 If You're So Rich, Why Aren't You Smart?
169
Intermission: Meanwhile, in Chile
193
Part Four: What Happened Next?
199
8	 Enter Friedman
201
9	 The Morbid Symptoms
229
10	 What Is to Be Done?
257
Further Reading
275
Acknowledgements
283
Index
285

ix
Author's Note
A great deal of intellectual energy is wasted on trying to attri-
bute events to the categories of 'conspiracy or cock-up', when 
most of them should probably be blamed on something more 
abstract. History is the study of decisions, not of events, and 
many decisions are best understood as the outcome of larger 
systems rather than individual acts of will.
Systems don't have motivations, so they don't have hidden 
motivations. If the system consistently produces a particular 
outcome, then that's its purpose. But on the other hand, systems 
don't make mistakes. Just as it's impossible to get lost if you 
don't know where you're going, a decision-making system does 
what it does and then either lives with the consequences or dies 
of them.
This book talks about a lot of people, and at various points 
it might look like I'm criticising someone, often quite harshly. 
That's usually not what I'm trying to do. The people are 
brought into the story because that's the only way to sensibly 
describe the systems they were part of. If it hadn't been them, 
it would have been someone else. If this book had a real villain, 
we might identify it as 'the regrettable tendency of complex 
systems to have opaque and volatile dynamics'.

part one
THE NATURE OF THE CRISIS

3
Introduction
What counts as a crisis is the expectation of loss of 
control; in other words, cybernetic breakdown in an 
institution.
Stafford Beer, Brain of the Firm (2nd edn), 1981
When we avoid making a decision, what happens to it?
This is a book about the industrialisation of decision-­making 
- the methods by which, over the last century, the developed 
world has arranged its society and economy so that import-
ant institutions are run by processes and systems, operating 
on standardised sets of information, rather than by individ-
ual human beings reacting to individual circumstances. This 
has led to a fundamental change in the relationship between 
decision makers and those affected by their decisions, the vast 
population of what might be called 'the decided-upon'. That 
relationship used to be what we called 'accountability', and this 
book is about the ways in which accountability has atrophied.
In 1954, for example, Sir Thomas Dugdale resigned from 
the British cabinet over something thereafter known as 'the 
Crichel Down affair' (a relatively trivial piece of malpractice 
relating to some farmland which had been requisitioned during 
the Second World War). It was unclear whether he had actu-
ally been involved in the decision, but in the climate of the day 

The Unaccountability Machine
4
his position was untenable - as the minister in charge, he bore 
responsibility for what happened. This small but honourable 
act ensured that Dugdale's name will live on eternally; both he 
and the small area of Dorset which brought about his downfall 
are mentioned every time a modern British politician dodges 
the blame.
On the other side of the Atlantic, in 1953, President Harry S. 
Truman had a sign on his desk reading 'The Buck Stops Here'. 
Sixty-six years later, President Donald Trump mused that 'the 
buck stops with everybody' when asked who bore responsibil-
ity for a government shutdown. Anyone who has dealt with a 
corporation or bureaucracy of any size, and who is over the 
age of forty, is likely to have a vague sense that you used to be 
able to speak to a person and get things done; the world wasn't 
always a maze of options menus.
Industrial societies have been given a great deal of warning 
that something like this was going to happen. In the 1940s, the 
'managerial revolution' was regarded as the likely outcome of 
the increasing complexity of the economic system and the scale 
of private and public-sector organisations which had devel-
oped to deal with it. The decline in individual accountability 
for unpopular decisions is not - or not only - a form of moral 
decline on the part of our rulers. It's also a consequence of 
the fact that there are fewer decision makers than there used 
to be. Nearly all the commands and constraints which afflict 
the modern individual, the decisions which used to be made 
by identifiable rulers and bosses, are now the result of systems 
and processes.
It is most obvious that something has changed when a deci-
sion which used to be made by a human being is made by a 
literal algorithm - a computer program. For example, people 
worry a great deal about, and legislators attempt to regulate, 

Introduction
5
the practice of using artificial intelligence to decide whether 
you are turned down for a loan or denied insurance coverage. 
But a decision-making system is not just a computer. Financial 
and other decisions have been made on the basis of handbooks 
and lists of criteria since the days in which they were recorded 
with quill pens. The very parliamentary committees that 
attempt to regulate artificial intelligence are themselves bound 
by opaque and complicated rule books, designed to standardise 
their proceedings and to avoid having decisions attributed to 
any individual human being.
For a while, in the early days of this profound social change, 
people tried to understand what was going on. The study of 
decision-making systems was a big thing - they called it 'cyber-
netics'. But for a number of reasons, it never took off.
The most important reason was that the new science was a 
victim of its own technological success. The key figures in the 
early days of cybernetics - people like Norbert Wiener, John 
von Neumann and Claude Shannon - are almost all much more 
famous as pioneers of computing. In trying to invent a math­
ematical language to describe their problem, they quickly made 
a lot of discoveries relating to the representation of informa-
tion and the operations that could be performed on it. These 
discoveries turned out to be extremely useful in the design of 
electronic circuits. Consequently, there was a huge and rapid 
brain drain away from the abstract study of decision-making 
systems and into the new industry of manufacturing com-
puters. In many ways, when presented with such a golden 
opportunity, you would have had to have been rather odd not 
to have taken it.
Related to this fact, many of the people who were involved 
in the early days of cybernetics were a bit odd. In this book, 
we'll look at Stafford Beer, a British management scientist 

The Unaccountability Machine
6
and consultant. Among other things in his life, he designed a 
method of holding conferences based on an icosahedron, and 
he tried to use an algae-filled pond as a computer. And he was 
the sensible one - the cybernetician who obtained high-­powered 
consultancy jobs in industry and provided huge amounts of 
support to the real oddballs working in the field. The more I 
have looked into the science of 'management cybernetics', the 
more I have realised that there is no way to rid it of a funda-
mental core of eccentricity.
But something else also happened, because cybernetics 
didn't die a natural death. The most obvious place for these 
ideas about the organisation of a modern economy would 
surely have been within the subject of economics, but they 
didn't end up there. Some elements of management cybernet-
ics - even some of the ideas of Stafford Beer himself - live on in 
business schools, usually as personal idiosyncrasies of individ-
ual researchers. In the economics departments, however, they 
have their own theories.
The way in which the economics profession ignored most 
of the work done in information theory is striking. It ignored 
its own traditions relating to uncertainty and decision-making, 
instead ploughing ahead with a frighteningly simplistic view of 
the world in which everything could be reduced to a single goal 
of shareholder value maximisation.
Why did they do this? Any account of how we got to where 
we are must cover three intellectual and organisational revolu-
tions. There was one that happened but we forgot about it - the 
managerial revolution, where control was transferred from 
owners and capitalists to professional administrators. There 
was one that looked like it was going somewhere interesting 
but never arrived - the cybernetic revolution, which might have 
helped us understand that what mattered were the systems of 

Introduction
7
professional management rather than the individual managers. 
And then, sometime in the early 1970s, we had the neoliberal 
revolution, which succeeded in shaping our society and its dis-
contents, right up to the present day.
In a more fortunate counterfactual history, this book might 
have told the story of an academic debate between the neoliberal 
economists and the management cyberneticians, on the nature 
of a corporation and the organisation of decision-­making. But 
that debate didn't happen. Or rather, it did happen, but not 
with diagrams and equations. It played out, very suddenly, with 
helicopters and guns at the presidential palace of La Moneda, 
in Chile on 11 September 1973, when the government of Sal-
vador Allende was brought down by a coup led by General 
Augusto Pinochet, and Stafford Beer's consultancy project to 
bring a new form of economic organisation to the country 
came to an abrupt end.
Cybernetics was arguably in trouble long before the coup, 
but that was the moment that the world finally chose a different 
path. In doing so, we began to get into the habit of ignoring the 
fact that every year, more of the decisions that affect our lives 
are made not by people but by systems. Strange, alien intelli-
gences with desires and drives quite different from our own. 
They're taking over the world - and not only that, for it seems 
that some of them are going mad.
But we should start this story at the beginning.

9
1
'Something's Up'
Capitalism is disappearing, but Socialism is not replacing 
it. What is now arising is a new kind of planned, 
centralised society which will be neither capitalist nor, in 
any accepted sense of the word, democratic. The rulers 
of this new society will be the people who effectively 
control the means of production: that is, business 
executives, technicians, bureaucrats and soldiers.
George Orwell, 'James Burnham and the Managerial 
Revolution', 1946
'Yes. But those clowns put us in an awkward place where we're 
going to have to thread the needle.'
An executive at Fox News called Ron Mitchell wrote those 
words, in an email which later showed up in court documents, 
and you could hardly ask for a better summary of the state of 
Republican politics at the beginning of the 2020s. The litiga-
tion in which Mitchell was quoted related to a defamation case 
which ended up being settled for $787.5m, the second largest 
such case in American history
The nature of the defamation was about as serious as they 
get; over a period of months, Fox News had repeatedly accused 
Dominion Systems, a manufacturer of voting machines, of 
conspiring to rig the 2020 US presidential election. This was, 

The Unaccountability Machine
10
to be clear, unequivocally false. Strangely, though, the emails 
and texts turned up in pre-trial disclosure seemed to confirm 
that nearly all the executives and journalists at Fox News knew 
that this was false, and that the people making the accusations 
were 'kooks', 'wackadoodle' and 'cruel and reckless'. But they 
kept broadcasting them anyway.
Why did they do it? This question never got put to them 
properly, because the case was settled on the courthouse steps. 
But the cache of emails suggests that they felt they had no 
choice. Having initially reported, correctly, that Donald Trump 
had lost the election, Fox News was completely unprepared for 
the consequent backlash from its viewers. The network had 
spent the previous four years working its audience up to a frenzy 
and the juggernaut couldn't be turned round - every attempt to 
break the bad news was treated as disrespect, and resulted in 
the loss of millions of viewers to less scrupulous broadcasters. 
In the words of one of Fox News's managing editors, 'weak 
ratings make good journalists do bad things'.
Many people destroyed their reputations and careers over 
the 2020 election, and the USA came considerably closer to 
an actual coup than anyone would have liked to have seen in 
the Capitol riots of 6 January 2021. The Fox News-Domin-
ion litigation gives a window into what was happening, but 
it's a darkened window, through which it's difficult to really 
see the structure of cause and effect. Nearly all the individual 
people involved wanted to be doing almost anything else rather 
than what they actually did. Even when they were broadcasting 
things they must have known to be false, they hoped that they 
weren't believed. What was going on here? How did it come to 
this?

'Something's Up'
11
Crimes without criminals
I should probably introduce myself at this point. I have a pro-
fessional interest in situations like this - cases where the exact 
thing that nobody wanted to happen has happened.
I was once an investment banker, and during the bouncing-­
rubble period of the last global financial crisis, I wrote a book 
called Lying for Money, about the history and economics of 
financial fraud. One of the big questions people were asking 
at that time was why, despite there being a strong popular per-
ception that hanging was too good for them, bankers were not 
going to jail. I ended up reaching a pretty surprising conclusion: 
that although there were a number of bad reasons why prose-
cutors were reluctant to take on the vested financial interests, 
the basic problem was that in a democratic society, if you want 
to put someone in prison then you need them to intentionally 
carry out a specific criminal act.
Many years ago, in an earlier financial crisis linked to small 
savings banks in the USA during the 1980s, the fraud inves-
tigator Bill Black had coined the concept of a 'criminogenic 
organisation'. It referred to an institution in which incentives 
and management systems were structurally designed to ensure 
that crimes would be committed. This was an integral part of 
his theory of the savings bank crisis, that of a 'control fraud'. 
This occurred when a bank came under the control of a crim-
inal, who was then able to set in place a system of incentives 
which ensured that fraudulent loans would be made and profits 
declared, which would naturally flow into the fraudster's 
pockets.
This solved several of the key problems that had bedevilled 
white-collar criminals over the years, the biggest of which was 
the need for overt acts of embezzlement. Stealing money by 
dishonesty had previously tended to require you to make illegal 

The Unaccountability Machine
12
transactions - improper payments or false bookkeeping entries 
- which posed a risk of detection. In a control fraud, the dis-
honesty resided in the overall scheme and all the transfers of 
cash were legitimate - dividends, salaries, stock options and 
commercial transactions with parties connected to the man-
agement. Furthermore, there was often a number of layers 
between the guilty mind and the criminal act - unless there 
was a paper trail, most of the prosecutable things were done 
by people other than those that the authorities would naturally 
want to prosecute.
As it happened, the technology was in its infancy in the 
1980s and most of the crooks pursued by Bill Black were care-
less about leaving the kind of paper trail he needed. But by the 
beginning of this century things had got weirder. After inves-
tigating some of the biggest scandals of the financial crisis, 
I concluded that not only was there no paper trail between 
the low-level crooks and the bosses, in most cases there was 
actually no connection. I ended up coining the term 'self-or-
ganising control fraud'. The idea was that the financial system 
of the developed world, from around the fall of Communism 
in Europe, had reached a point where the overall system of 
incentives in the economy was so criminogenic that banks 
had a natural tendency to organise themselves into fraudulent 
behaviour. All the top executives had to do was set unrealis-
tic profitability targets and under­invest in legal departments 
and compliance systems. It wasn't so much that anyone had 
told their traders what to do; more that nobody ever organ-
ised things in such a way that they wouldn't form a criminal 
conspiracy.

'Something's Up'
13
The polycrisis and me
There is a definite family resemblance between the self-­
organising criminogenicity of the 2008 financial crisis and the 
stuff that went on at Fox News in 2020 - the 'criminogenic 
organisation' might really just be a special case of the 'struc-
turally bad decision-making organisation'. But, when provided 
with a lot of spare time during the pandemic, I started wonder-
ing more about the raw material of the Capitol Hill riots. These 
angry people, whose reactions were so frightening, so difficult 
to control - where did they come from?
To a certain extent, of course, Fox News made them. Over 
twenty-five years, it had become a media colossus, largely based 
on two creative insights. First, that some people enjoy being 
angry, and will consume their rage as a product. And second, 
that some presenters have the gift of making people angry, just 
like a comedian can make people laugh.
But there's more to it than that. Fox News couldn't actually 
control the rage of its audience, as it belatedly found out. And 
it's not intellectually satisfying to create a theory of Trump 
voters that only explains that one phenomenon. Because 
almost everywhere you look in the world over the last couple 
of decades, you will find popular movements and trends that 
look quite similar. Silvio Berlusconi was the Trump of Italy. Jair 
Bolsonaro was the Trump of Brazil. Angry people, politically 
incoherent populist politicians and media organisations that 
sell productised rage are everywhere. It can't be a coincidence; 
we need a theory that covers them all.
The historian and writer Adam Tooze refers to a 'polycrisis' 
of the twenty-first century. This is an umbrella term covering a 
lot of these phenomena, held together by a kind of structural 
resemblance. The defining characteristic of the polycrisis is a 
loss of control by the previously existing hierarchy. It's often 

The Unaccountability Machine
14
associated with an economic crisis of some sort, as in Greece in 
the early 2010s, but not always. There's a sudden loss of prestige, 
as the professional and managerial class makes a high-profile 
mistake. And the populists and the merchants of rage step into 
that gap. So the questions that need to be answered are: how 
does this happen? And why?
The people who left and came back
One of the stylised facts that interested me is that the people 
most involved in the ground level of the polycrisis were often 
the ones who had been disenfranchised for long periods before 
it began. You could see this in the Brexit vote in the UK. The 
turnout for that referendum was shockingly high, compared 
to the previous decade of general elections. The winning vote 
came from people who had not voted for a long time.
But why would they have bothered voting? Think about the 
period from the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 to the bank-
ruptcy of Lehman Brothers in 2008. There had been hardly any 
choices to make. If you wanted to vote against globalisation, 
you couldn't. Wanted to vote for higher top rates of income tax 
or tighter bank regulation? Couldn't. Or the level of interest 
rates - it wasn't even possible to have a political opinion about 
it. You might be able to vote against further privatisation, but 
there was no political party that would reverse the old ones. 
If you were against immigration, you had no party to vote for 
either. All you had were choices between moderate centrist 
technocrats, competing on the grounds of who might manage 
the system more competently, in an economic context of gently 
growing prosperity. People lost interest because it was rational 
for them to lose interest - nothing needed to change and there 
was no way to change it.

'Something's Up'
15
Then the 2008 financial crisis happened, followed by a long 
period of recession and austerity, and suddenly it turned out 
that the technocratic consensus wasn't as competent or moder-
ate as it had appeared. Ten to twenty per cent of the electorate 
suddenly realised that they might have to take an interest in 
politics after all. So they started paying attention again, and 
they didn't have the basic assumptions of the mainstream. All 
they knew was that the people who used to be in charge seemed 
to have screwed things up mightily.
The accountability sinks
Bad things were happening, but they didn't seem to be any-
body's fault. This was infuriating to everyone; the CEOs, 
political leaders and other figureheads had been drawing big 
salaries and bonuses, and telling all of us that they knew best, 
but it turned out that they didn't even know what was going on 
in their own organisations. There was no mechanism to punish 
individual human beings, so the hoi polloi defaulted to what 
seemed like the only alternative - to use the democratic powers 
available to them to tear down the whole system.
The relationship between experts, decision makers and 
the general public had become completely dysfunctional. This 
wasn't really a crisis of managerialism or a crisis of political 
legitimacy - it was a crisis of accountability. And if account-
ability was at the root of the crisis, then maybe the things to 
look at were the mechanisms that cause it to be diminished.
Consider, for example, the following situation. A character-
istically modern form of social interaction, familiar from the 
rail and air travel industries, has become ubiquitous with the 
development of the call centre. Someone - an airline gate atten-
dant, for example - tells you some bad news; perhaps you've 

The Unaccountability Machine
16
been bumped from the flight in favour of someone with more 
frequent flyer points. You start to complain and point out how 
much you paid for your ticket, but you're brought up short by 
the undeniable fact that the gate attendant can't do anything 
about it. You ask to speak to someone who can do something 
about it, but you're told that's not company policy.
The unsettling thing about this conversation is that you pro-
gressively realise that the human being you are speaking to is 
only allowed to follow a set of processes and rules that pass on 
decisions made at a higher level of the corporate hierarchy. It's 
often a frustrating experience; you want to get angry, but you 
can't really blame the person you're talking to. Somehow, the 
airline has constructed a state of affairs where it can speak to 
you with the anonymous voice of an amorphous corporation, 
but you have to talk back to it as if it were a person like yourself.
Bad people react to this by getting angry at the gate atten-
dant; good people walk away stewing with thwarted rage, and 
they may give some lacerating feedback online. Meanwhile, 
the managers who made the decision to prioritise Gold Elite 
members are able to maximise shareholder value without any 
distractions from the consequences of their actions. They have 
constructed an accountability sink to absorb unwanted nega-
tive emotion.
The fundamental law of accountability
It is important to be clear, at this stage, exactly what an 
accountability sink is, and how they are constructed.* It's not 
* If nothing else, you'll have a few tips about how to set things up in 
your own job to divert any troublesome accountability that might be 
building up.

'Something's Up'
17
just the way in which the hourly paid worker has been set up to 
act as a human shield. In order to make the sink effective, you 
need a combination of things: that person, plus a policy that 
there's no way to appeal the decision by communicating with a 
higher level of management. (Even if you somehow managed to 
get the CEO's phone number, you would come up against the 
fact that the policy was in place precisely to protect them from 
making that decision personally.)
So the crucial thing at work here seems to be the delega-
tion of the decision to a rule book, removing the human from 
the process and thereby severing the connection that's needed 
in order for the concept of accountability to make sense. You 
could even coin a sort of law of management here:
The fundamental law of accountability: the extent to 
which you are able to change a decision is precisely the 
extent to which you can be accountable for it, and vice 
versa.
The construction of accountability sinks has damaging 
implications for the flow of information. For an accountability 
sink to function, it has to break a link; it has to prevent the 
feedback of the person affected by the decision from affect-
ing the operation of the system. The decision has to be fully 
determined by the policy, which means that it cannot be altered 
by any information that wasn't anticipated. If somebody can 
override the accountability sink and overrule a policy that is in 
danger of generating a ridiculous or disgusting outcome, then 
that person is potentially accountable for the outcome.
When an organisation decides to create an accountabil-
ity sink, it's taking a risk. Implicitly, every rule is a model of 
the world - you can see both a model and a rule book as a 

The Unaccountability Machine
18
relationship between causes and effects, inputs and outputs. 
But because they can't be a model of the whole world, both a 
rule book and a model have to leave out a lot of detail. That 
means that, like a model, a rule has to be based on assumptions 
about the kinds of situations that might need to have decisions 
made about them. So a notice on the wall of an office that says 
'STAFF HAVE NO ACCESS TO THE SAFE' implies a set of 
assumptions about the kind of person who might walk in off 
the street and ask staff to open the safe, while a notice that 
says 'NO REFUNDS - NO EXCEPTIONS' carries an implicit 
assumption that there will never be a case where a customer is 
entitled to a refund.
When an unanticipated situation arises - either because 
something unusual has happened, or because the accountabil-
ity sink was badly designed - there will be a mismatch between 
the input that the system anticipated, and what it actually 
got. And, because the system has been designed to work as an 
accountability sink, the outcome could be gruesome or absurd. 
Consider, for example, the tale of an airline and a few hundred 
furry mammals.
The squirrel shredders of Schiphol
Back in the 1990s, ground squirrels were briefly fashionable pets, 
but their popularity came to an abrupt end after an incident at 
Schiphol Airport on the outskirts of Amsterdam. In April 1999, 
a cargo of 440 of the rodents arrived on a KLM flight from 
Beijing, without the necessary import papers. Because of this, 
they could not be forwarded on to the customer in Athens. But 
nobody was able to correct the error and send them back either. 
What could be done with them?
It's hard to think there wasn't a better solution than the one 

'Something's Up'
19
that was carried out; faced with the paperwork issue, airport 
staff threw all 440 squirrels into an industrial shredder, apart 
from a few that had previously escaped from the animal con-
tainment facility. In later weeks, it transpired that this shredder 
was a specialised piece of machinery used in the poultry indus-
try to dispose of worthless male chicks. Before the story hit 
the headlines, ground staff had over a period of months shred-
ded 200 other squirrels, several dozen water turtles and a small 
flock of parakeets.
The press release in which KLM apologised for this horrible 
fiasco was a masterpiece of the genre that's still studied in busi-
ness schools as an effective example of crisis PR. But it's less 
fascinating for its deflection of blame than for the underlying 
system that it revealed.
It turned out that the order to destroy the squirrels had 
come from the Dutch government's Department of Agricul-
ture, Environment Management and Fishing. However, KLM's 
management, with the benefit of hindsight, said that 'this order, 
in this form and without feasible alternatives,* was unethical'. 
The employees had acted 'formally correctly' by obeying the 
order, but KLM acknowledged that they had made an 'assess-
ment mistake' in doing so. The company's board expressed 
'sincere regret' for the way things had turned out, and there's 
no reason to doubt their sincerity.
So what went wrong, and who was responsible for shred-
ding the squirrels? The first question is easier to answer than 
the second. KLM had set up a system whereby decisions about 
animals with the wrong import paperwork were left to someone 
* The De Meern Foundation for the Shelter of Squirrels, the Netherlands' 
only specialist squirrel rescue organisation, was particularly annoyed 
about not having been asked whether it could help.

The Unaccountability Machine
20
at the agriculture department. In doing so, everyone involved 
had accepted that a low baseline level of animal destruction 
was tolerable - which is why they bought the poultry shredder. 
But, in so far as it is possible to reconstruct the reasoning, it 
was presumed that the destruction of living creatures would 
be rare, more used as a threat to encourage people to take care 
over their paperwork rather than something that would happen 
to hundreds of significantly larger mammals than the newborn 
chicks for which the shredder had been designed.
The characterisation of the employees' decision as an 
'assessment mistake' is revealing; in retrospect, the only safe-
guard in this system was the nebulous expectation that the 
people tasked with disposing of the animals might decide to 
disobey direct instructions if the consequences of following 
them looked sufficiently grotesque. It's doubtful whether it had 
ever been communicated to them that they were meant to be 
second-guessing their instructions on ethical grounds; most of 
the time, people who work in sheds aren't given the authority 
to overrule the government. In any case, it is neither psycholog-
ically plausible nor managerially realistic to expect someone 
to follow orders 99 per cent of the time and then suddenly act 
independently on the hundredth instance.
For their part, the people in the agriculture ministry were a 
long way from the workers who had to carry out their instruc-
tions. They had a responsibility to protect the biosecurity of 
the Netherlands and implement the relevant European regu-
lations that required health checks for imported squirrels. A 
policy stating that 'commercial imports of pets must provide 
veterinary paperwork, or else the animals will be returned 
to their port of origin or euthanised at the expense of the 
importer' looks sensible enough, and would cover the over-
whelming majority of cases. And with the policy implemented, 

'Something's Up'
21
each decision to order the destruction of animal cargo is just a 
matter of following the policy.
That's the purpose of making policies - to reduce the 
amount of time and effort spent making decisions on individual 
cases. However, it's also the root cause of this sort of problem. 
When you set a general policy, you either need to build in a 
system for making exceptions (and make sure that it is used), or 
you need to be confident that all the outcomes of enforcing that 
policy will be acceptable. In the case of the policy with regard 
to rodent imports, this wasn't the case; the Schiphol incident 
led to an emergency debate in the Dutch parliament. The top 
management of KLM were, in fact, so appalled that within a 
few months the airline had a new policy of refusing to ship any 
exotic animals at all - while Schiphol Airport came close to 
losing its certification as an import centre because the company 
that ran the 'animal hotel' there had gone bust.
Although dramatised by grim humour, the KLM squirrel 
debacle illustrates a few potentially important things about the 
underlying reality of management and information. A deci-
sion with no real owner had been created because it was the 
outcome of a process. The process worked well, until some-
thing that hadn't been anticipated (the pet squirrel craze) 
showed up, and then it delivered disastrous results. There was 
no effective way in which information could be fed back to the 
people who could change the policy, so the decisions continued 
to get worse. And then, when something so outrageous hap-
pened that it couldn't be kept out of the newspapers, there was 
nobody to blame.
This property of there being 'nobody to blame' is the defi-
nition of what constitutes an accountability sink. It's not clear 
what KLM should have done when faced with a consignment 
of 400 squirrels from a breeder who refused to obey the import 

The Unaccountability Machine
22
regulations. The best solution would have been to refuse to 
load the cargo in Beijing, but the plane had already flown. 
Tragically, the decision to put them down and then bear the 
public opprobrium might even have been correct. But making 
a specific decision to kill the squirrels would have been much 
less psychologically tolerable for the policy-making managers 
than simply creating a system which ensured that they would 
be shredded unless a lowly employee disobeyed a specific order. 
In some ways, a disaster like the Schiphol squirrel episode can 
be seen as the policy mechanism providing one of its intended 
functions - acting like a car's crumple-zone to shield any indi-
vidual manager from a disastrous decision.
Accountability and its discontents
There are a number of reasons why people might construct 
accountability sinks. The most fundamental one is that being 
held accountable for things is horrible. The key privilege of 
being a manager, surely, ought to be that you have the status of 
being a manager rather than one of the managed. Having your 
decisions questioned, and having pressure placed on you to 
change them - which, if the fundamental law above is correct, 
is the essence of accountability - is humiliating and unpleasant. 
Not only that, but in large organisations, the kind of conflict 
that's implicit in a system where individuals make decisions is 
potentially corrosive of trust and relationships. Let's consider, 
as an example, the accountability sink in the academic pub-
lishing industry, through which scholarly papers are gathered 
in journals and sold to university libraries.
Once upon a time, academic publishing was largely a non-
profit affair - most scientific and humanities journals were 
published either by universities or by learned societies, to keep 

'Something's Up'
23
their members up to date with new research. The articles were 
selected by editors and put through a system of 'peer review' 
whereby journal publishers would request comments from aca-
demics who were specialists in the field (anonymously, to ensure 
that the reviewers were objective and so people would not fear 
the professional consequences of criticising a fellow scholar). 
On the basis of this review, papers would be revised, resubmit-
ted and accepted for publication. It was (and is) a laborious 
process, and many owners of journals were glad to sell them to 
private-sector publishers.
Academic publishing is extremely profitable. The foun-
dations of Robert Maxwell's media empire were built on 
Pergamon Press, which was one of the first companies to realise 
that the business model has two incredibly favourable proper-
ties. Firstly, the customer base is captive and highly vulnerable 
to price gouging. A university library has to have access to the 
best journals, without which the members of the university 
can't keep up with their field or do their own research.
Secondly, although the publishers who bought the titles 
took over the responsibility for their administration and distri-
bution, this is a small part of the effort involved in producing 
an academic journal, compared to the actual work of writing 
the articles and peer-reviewing them. This service is provided to 
the publishers by academics, for free or for a nominal payment 
(often paid in books or subscriptions to journals). So not only 
does the industry have both a captive customer base and a 
captive source of free labour, these two commercial assets are 
for the most part the same group of people.
A not-wholly-unfair analysis of academic publishing would 
be that it is an industry in which academics compete against one 
another for the privilege of providing free labour for a profit-­
making company, which then sells the results back to them at 

The Unaccountability Machine
24
monopoly prices. It is, as you'd expect from that description, 
highly profitable - and passionately hated by the academics.
However, the model persists because somewhere along the 
way, the journal industry managed to insert itself into the staff 
promotion and recruitment function of universities all over the 
world. In doing so, it created an extremely useful accountability 
sink for senior academics and managers of universities, while 
also solving an awkward and unpleasant interpersonal problem 
for them - how to judge the quality of scholarship without 
offending the scholars.
The truly valuable output of the academic publishing indus-
try is not journals, but citations. Academic papers cite one 
another, and the best ones get cited a lot. Some journals tend 
to systematically publish more of the highly cited papers than 
others, and so these are regarded as the best journals with the 
highest standards. If you can work out which are the best jour-
nals, and which scholars publish in them, and which papers get 
the most prestigious citations, then you can use fairly standard 
statistical techniques to generate a 'score' for every academic, 
describing how well-cited their work is compared to their peers. 
The process is quite similar to the PageRank algorithm used 
by Google to decide which web pages to show first in search 
results.
At this stage you might suggest that 'indexing billions of 
web pages' and 'assessing the influence and quality of schol-
arship' are very different tasks; surely nobody should expect 
an algorithm designed for one to be any good at the other. Set 
against that objection is the fact that if you have to decide which 
academics should be promoted or employed, the 'weighted cita-
tion count' is a perfect accountability sink. Academic politics 
is notoriously vicious, and academic careers tend to intersect 
a lot - what goes around comes around, and people need to 

'Something's Up'
25
collaborate. In that sort of environment, a system in which aca-
demics directly assessed each other's promotion cases would 
cause all sorts of interpersonal problems; it would be difficult 
to work productively with someone if you were known to have 
previously judged their research to be less excellent than one 
of their peers.
So although the citation index is in all probability a bad 
measure that seems to lock the universities into an expen-
sive and unsatisfactory publishing model, the outsourcing of 
the academic performance measurement system is a solution 
rather than a problem. It redirects potentially destructive nega-
tive emotions to a place where they can be relatively harmlessly 
dissipated.
How health and safety goes mad
The accountability sink doesn't just dissipate resentment 
and jealousy - deployed correctly, it can shield organisations 
against legal liability and similar threats. A decision made by 
an individual can be second-guessed and questioned, and it 
can be the object of litigation. A policy, on the other hand, 
is harder to challenge, particularly if it is made public. Fairly 
obviously, if decisions are taken in line with a pre-existing 
policy, they cannot be characterised as the result of caprice or 
prejudice. And if a policy is made publicly available ahead of 
time, anyone who interacts with the organisation can be argued 
to have implicitly accepted it. None of these defences are bul-
letproof - KLM's policy didn't save them from public shaming 
in the squirrel-shredding episode - but they provide significant 
shields against material business risks.
Accountability sinks are even more important when the 
insurance industry gets involved. Insurance is a business of risk 

The Unaccountability Machine
26
pooling - it only works because the average of a lot of similar 
events is much more predictable than any single event. Actuar-
ies (the specialist mathematicians who set pricing and terms for 
insurance policies) work by creating averages and probability 
distributions, not by analysing the unique and specific char-
acteristics of every possible outcome someone might want to 
insure. For this reason, insurance underwriters love consistent 
processes; standardisation is a key part of what they do. Once a 
risk assessment is subject to a set of rules, the class of uncertain 
events covered by the (corporate) policy can be covered by an 
(insurance) policy.
When a risk is covered by an insurance policy, however, 
being accountable for a decision becomes not just psycholog-
ically unpleasant, but financially risky. If you've agreed with 
your insurer that something will be required or forbidden, then 
even if it seems obvious that an exception should be made, it's 
possible that you would be invalidating your policy to do so. If 
something goes wrong, the insurance company is often not set 
up to listen to your explanations; it has hundreds of customers, 
and it would be unrealistically expensive for it to employ loss 
adjusters to adjudicate the validity of every single claim.
How crises happen?
I have to admit, I got pretty excited about the accountability-­
sink concept when I came up with it, a few years ago. We were 
looking at a crisis of legitimacy, which involved a crisis of man-
agerialism, and they were both really crises of accountability. 
The last few decades had seen the rise of the professional and 
managerial class in the economy and society. These people 
had been able to reorganise and re-engineer many of the most 
important institutions from politics to business to finance and 

