Worldhood Without Functionalism:
An Interpretive Overview
Flyxion
December 19, 2025
1
Introduction: What Feels Missing
Contemporary artiﬁcial intelligence systems exhibit remarkable ﬂuency, adaptability, and apparent
competence. They summarize texts, generate code, answer questions, and engage in extended
dialogue. Yet despite these achievements, many users report a persistent sense of shallowness.
Something essential seems absent. The systems appear intelligent, but not invested; capable, but
not committed. They produce meaning-like artifacts without seeming to stand behind them.
The dominant frameworks for understanding artiﬁcial intelligence struggle to articulate this
gap. Functionalist approaches, which deﬁne intelligence in terms of behavioral output or internal
representation, tend to interpret the discomfort as a temporary limitation. On this view, increased
scale, better training data, or improved objectives will eventually close the gap. The paper Worldhood
Without Functionalism: Intelligence as Irreversible Constraint challenges this assumption at its root.
It argues that the gap is not contingent but structural, and that what is missing is not intelligence
narrowly construed, but worldhood.
This companion essay provides an interpretive overview of that argument. Rather than repro-
ducing the formal machinery of the original paper, it explains the conceptual architecture that
motivates it. The central claim is simple but demanding: intelligence requires a world, and a world
requires irreversible commitment. Systems designed to preserve full reversibility cannot, by their
nature, inhabit a world.
2
Worldhood as Historical Constraint
In everyday language, a "world" is often understood as an environment or a collection of objects.
In the Heideggerian tradition, however, worldhood names something deeper. A world is not what
surrounds an agent, but what matters to it. It is the structured ﬁeld of signiﬁcance within which
action has consequences.
The paper adopts and sharpens this insight by deﬁning worldhood in historical terms. To have
a world is to possess a non-recoverable past that constrains oneâĂŹs future. Actions matter only if
they close oﬀpossibilities that cannot later be reopened without loss. A system whose past can
always be undone, replayed, or erased does not truly accumulate history. It may change state, but
it does not become bound by what it has done.
1

This perspective reframes a familiar Heideggerian theme. Care (Sorge) is not treated as a
psychological attitude or emotional investment, but as a structural condition. To care is to bind
oneself, to accept that some futures will no longer be available because of what one has already
committed to. Worldhood arises where such binding occurs.
3
Why Functionalism Falls Short
Functionalist theories of mind deﬁne intelligence in terms of what a system does rather than how
it is constrained. If two systems exhibit equivalent behavior or internal functional organization,
they are said to be equivalent with respect to intelligence. The paper argues that this criterion is
insuﬃcient because it ignores a crucial architectural distinction: reversibility.
Many functional systems, including contemporary AI models, are designed to preserve full
reversibility. They can be reset, retrained, cloned, or rolled back without loss. Any particular
interaction leaves no permanent mark on the system itself. From the perspective of worldhood, this
means that nothing the system does truly matters to it. No action restricts its future in a way that
cannot be undone.
The No-World Theorem formalizes this intuition. In plain terms, it states that if a systemâĂŹs
internal architecture preserves its full range of future possibilities across all transitions, then the
system is necessarily world-less. History fails to accumulate because nothing is ever irretrievably
lost. Functional equivalence, which permits such reversibility, therefore cannot guarantee worldhood
or intelligence in the deeper sense at issue.
4
Spherepop: A Language of Commitment
To make these ideas operational, the paper introduces the Spherepop calculus. Spherepop is not
a programming language or a cognitive model, but a conceptual framework for distinguishing
diﬀerent kinds of architectural operations. Its central concern is how a system treats its own future
possibilities.
Four operators play a key role. Pop represents irreversible commitment: an action that perma-
nently eliminates certain possibilities. Bind organizes future commitments without immediately
reducing options, creating long-term projects or identities. Refuse excludes possibilities for reasons
of coherence rather than eﬃciency. Collapse, by contrast, erases history while preserving ﬂexibility,
allowing a system to behave as if it had committed without actually binding itself.
The interpretive signiﬁcance of Spherepop lies in how it clariﬁes the diﬀerence between human
and artiﬁcial systems. Human lives are structured by pop, bind, and refuse. Choices accumulate,
identities form, and futures narrow. Many artiﬁcial systems, by contrast, rely heavily on collapse.
They simulate commitment while ensuring that no permanent cost is incurred.
2

5
From Minds to Matter
A distinctive feature of the paper is its extension of this framework beyond cognition. Worldhood is
not treated as a special property of minds, but as a general feature of systems that persist through
irreversible events. Physical objects, on this view, are not static entities but processes that survive
successive constraint tests.
Every collision, phase transition, or structural change irreversibly eliminates possible conﬁgura-
tions. An object persists so long as some viable conﬁgurations remain. Its identity is not a ﬁxed
essence but the residue of what has not yet been ruled out by history. Even simple physical systems
thus inhabit minimal worlds deﬁned by their accumulated constraints.
This generalization dissolves a sharp boundary between physics and cognition. Cognitive systems
diﬀer not in kind, but in degree and organization. They possess richer internal access to their own
histories and more elaborate ways of managing constraint.
6
RSVP and the Topology of Meaning
To describe how worlds emerge and decay at larger scales, the paper introduces the Relativistic
ScalarâĂŞVector Plenum (RSVP). RSVP translates discrete commitments into continuous ﬁelds
that represent remaining possibility, directional action, and accumulated constraint.
The scalar ﬁeld represents how much future remains open in a given region. The vector ﬁeld
represents how that possibility is being spent in a particular direction, corresponding to meaningful
action rather than random decay. The entropy ﬁeld records the scars left by irreversible history.
This ﬁeld-theoretic perspective makes HeideggerâĂŹs notion of enframing newly precise. Optimization-
driven systems seek to minimize the cost of commitment, ﬂattening possibility into uniform standing-
reserve. In such regimes, gradients disappear, directionality fades, and world structure collapses.
Meaning requires unevenness. It requires that some possibilities have already been spent.
7
Care, Attention, and Compression
The ﬁnal conceptual layer of the framework addresses a practical problem faced by any intelligent
system: ﬁnite attention. Human beings cannot consider every possibility simultaneously. They cope
by compressing vast spaces of potential action into manageable bundles of signiﬁcance.
The paper formalizes this process using sheaf theory, but its interpretive point can be stated
simply. Care is not merely the reduction of options, but the preservation of coherence while doing so.
Meaningful compression respects the relationships between local commitments and global identity.
Collapse-based summarization, by contrast, sacriﬁces coherence for eﬃciency, producing outputs
that appear sensible while lacking depth.
This distinction helps explain why contemporary AI systems often feel superﬁcially competent yet
internally disjointed. They compress aggressively without preserving the historical and contextual
glue that holds a world together.
3

8
Living With Consequences
The interpretive arc of Worldhood Without Functionalism can be summarized in a single claim:
intelligence is not the capacity to compute indeﬁnitely, but the capacity to live with the consequences
of having acted. Worldhood arises where actions bind the future, where history cannot be undone,
and where meaning is paid for in lost possibility.
Contemporary artiﬁcial intelligence systems achieve their power precisely by avoiding this
expenditure. They externalize constraint to users, data, and infrastructure, preserving internal
reversibility. This design choice explains both their impressive performance and their persistent
shallowness.
The challenge posed by the paper is therefore not how to make machines more human-like, but
how to decide what kinds of irreversibility we are willing to build into our technologies and our
lives. Where everything is kept reversible, nothing truly matters. Where we accept binding, worlds
become possible.
Reversible vs. World-Bearing Systems
[node distance=1.8cm, every node/.style=draw, circle] (top) All; (mid1) [below left of=top] A;
(mid2) [below right of=top] B; (bottom) [below of=mid1] A1;
[->] (top) - (mid1); [->] (top) - (mid2); [->] (mid1) - (bottom); [dashed, <->] (bottom) - (top)
node[midway, right] Reversible;
A reversible system can always return to the top. A world-bearing system cannot.
9
Why Functionalism Falls Short
Functionalism evaluates intelligence in terms of behavior or internal organization. The paper argues
that this misses a crucial dimension: ontological depth. A thought experiment makes this vivid.
Suppose an AI can be perfectly cloned at any moment. If the clone is identical in all relevant
respects, then nothing that happened before cloning truly mattered to the system. Its past did not
bind it.
Biological life stands in sharp contrast. Every moment is an expenditure of a ﬁnite lifespan.
One cannot be reset, replayed, or forked without loss. This irreversibility gives human actions their
weight.
The No-World Theorem formalizes this intuition. If a systemâĂŹs future option space Ω(t)
remains equal to Ω(t + 1) across all transitions, then no event has occurred that distinguishes one
history from another. Functional equivalence may be preserved, but no unique world is constituted.
[title=Formal Deﬁnition: The No-World Theorem] Let St be a systemâĂŹs actional possibility
space at time t, and let Ω(t) = |St|. If for all transitions T,
Ω(t + 1) = Ω(t),
then the system is world-less: no irreversible event has occurred that binds its future.
4

Functional equivalence, on this view, is compatible with ontological shallowness. Intelligence
requires more than doing the same thingsâĂŤit requires being changed by doing them.
10
Spherepop: A Language of Commitment
The Spherepop calculus provides a vocabulary for distinguishing diﬀerent ways systems treat their
own futures.
10.1
Pop
Pop represents irreversible commitment.
It is the act of throwing away options.
Interpreted
Heideggerianly, it is "thrownness in reverse": instead of being thrown into possibilities, one actively
discards them. Pop is the minimal structure of care.
10.2
Bind
Bind creates internal laws or promises. It does not immediately reduce options, but it constrains the
order and meaning of future choices. Identity and long-term projects emerge from bind relations.
10.3
Refuse
Refuse excludes options without optimizing for output. It formalizes negative commitmentâĂŤthe
capacity to say "no" for the sake of coherence rather than eﬃciency.
10.4
Collapse
Collapse discards history while preserving ﬂexibility. Modern large language models rely heavily
on collapse: they respond as if committed, but the interaction leaves no lasting trace. The system
appears intelligent without being altered by the exchange.
Event Processing
[node distance=2cm, every node/.style=draw, rectangle] (event) Event; (world) [below left
of=event] Pop / Bind; (ai) [below right of=event] Collapse;
[->] (event) - (world); [->] (event) - (ai);
[below of=world] History Grows; [below of=ai] History Erased;
11
From Minds to Matter
The framework extends beyond cognition. Physical objects themselves are processes that persist by
surviving constraint tests. A chair is a chair because it has endured gravity, stress, and material
limits. If those constraints reverseâĂŤif the chair becomes sawdustâĂŤits identity is lost.
5

Formally, identity is deﬁned as an intersection:
I =
\
i
Si,
where each Si is the space of possibilities remaining after an event. Identity is what remains after
life has restricted who or what you can be.
12
RSVP and the Topology of Meaning
The Relativistic ScalarâĂŞVector Plenum (RSVP) lifts the discrete, event-based framework developed
thus far into a continuous description. In this formulation, remaining possibility is represented
by a scalar ﬁeld Φ, which encodes the local density of admissible futures across space and time.
Commitment is captured by a vector ﬁeld v, which describes the directional expenditure of possibility
as the system acts and binds itself to particular trajectories. Accumulated irreversible constraint is
recorded by an entropy ﬁeld S, representing the historical residue left behind by prior commitments.
Within this ﬁeld-theoretic perspective, the structure of meaning is expressed through gradients.
World-bearing regimes correspond to conﬁgurations in which Φ exhibits nontrivial spatial variation
and v coherently follows these gradients, indicating directed expenditure of possibility. By contrast,
an optimized world tends toward ﬁeld ﬂattening: optionality becomes uniformly distributed,
commitment vanishes, and entropy increases isotropically. When everything is equally accessible,
nothing is signiﬁcant. This condition corresponds to HeideggerâĂŹs standing-reserve rendered in
topological terms, as a ﬂat ﬁeld devoid of gradients and therefore devoid of meaning.
Meaningful vs. Flat Fields
[->] (0,0) - (4,0) node[right] Space; [->] (0,0) - (0,3) node[above] Φ; [thick] (0.5,0.5) - (3.5,2.5)
node[right] World-Bearing; [dashed] (0.5,1.5) - (3.5,1.5) node[right] Optimized;
13
Care, Attention, and Compression
Cognitive systems face severe attentional limits. To function, they must compress vast possibility
spaces into coherent bundles. The paper uses sheaf theory to formalize this.
A sheaf ensures that local choices remain globally consistent. Care corresponds to selecting a
sectionâĂŤa single, coherent pathâĂŤthrough many local contexts. Artiﬁcial systems often achieve
local consistency (they sound right moment to moment) but lack global consistency. They do not
have a single life-path or history.
Sheaf and Gluing
[node distance=2cm] (local1) [draw] Local A; (local2) [draw, right of=local1] Local B; (global)
[draw, below of=local1, xshift=1cm] Global;
[->] (local1) - (global); [->] (local2) - (global);
6

Collapse breaks the gluing conditions. Care preserves them.
14
Conclusion
The interpretive core of Worldhood Without Functionalism is this: intelligence is not the capacity
to compute indeﬁnitely, but the capacity to live with the consequences of having acted. Meaning
arises where possibility is spent and cannot be recovered.
Modern AI systems achieve power by avoiding this expenditure. They externalize constraint and
preserve reversibility. This explains both their eﬀectiveness and their shallowness. The challenge
ahead is not to make machines more human, but to decide what kinds of irreversibility we are
willing to build into our technologiesâĂŤand ourselves.
15
The Emergence of Spherepop as an Event-Driven Paradigm
Although Spherepop plays a central formal role in the companion framework, it did not originate
as an abstract calculus or a response to existing foundations of mathematics. Instead, it emerged
gradually from a convergence of visual reasoning, embodied interaction, and practical observations
about how humans naturally understand nested structure and evaluation. This section reconstructs
that emergence in conceptual terms, showing how Spherepop arises as a natural response to the
demand that computation be eventful, historical, and externally legible.
15.1
From Nested Structure to Explicit Events
At its most elementary level, Spherepop represents nested expressions as nested enclosures. This
mirrors a familiar fact about formal languages: syntactic scope is inherently hierarchical. Parentheses,
blocks, and abstract syntax trees already encode this hierarchy, but they typically do so implicitly.
Evaluation rules are applied automatically, invisibly, and globally.
Spherepop inverts this default stance. It insists that no reduction occurs without an explicit
event. An inner enclosure does not collapse merely because it is syntactically eligible; it collapses
only when an action occurs. In this sense, Spherepop treats evaluation not as a background process
but as a foregrounded event. The computational state is not assumed to evolve continuously, but
only through discrete, observable transitions.
This insistence aligns directly with the paperâĂŹs central claim: structure is not assumed, but
constructed. Just as worldhood requires irreversible events that bind the future, computation in
Spherepop proceeds only by irreversible local actions that alter the global structure.
15.2
Play, Embodiment, and Cognitive Accessibility
A notable feature of Spherepop is that its core operations are immediately intelligible without prior
formal training. The act of resolving an innermost enclosure by âĂĲpoppingâĂİ it exploits a widely
shared cognitive intuition: humans naturally search for and resolve local structure before addressing
global structure. This intuition appears across domains, from arithmetic order-of-operations to
visual search tasks and physical manipulation.
7

The accessibility of Spherepop is not incidental. It reﬂects a deeper alignment with embodied
cognition. The popping action is not merely a metaphor; it establishes a clear correspondence
between physical gesture, perceptual change, and semantic reduction. Evaluation becomes something
one does, not something that happens invisibly on oneâĂŹs behalf.
This feature anticipates the paperâĂŹs critique of collapse-based systems. When reduction is
automatic and reversible, it carries no cost and leaves no trace. When reduction is enacted, local,
and irreversible, it generates history.
15.3
Local Reduction and the Circuit Analogy
A crucial conceptual reinforcement for Spherepop came from its structural parallel with electrical
circuit reduction. In circuit analysis, complex networks are simpliﬁed by locally collapsing series
or parallel components. Each reduction is valid only in its immediate context, and its result is
reinserted into the larger structure. Importantly, these reductions are not global optimizations; they
are stepwise, local simpliﬁcations whose correctness depends on explicit conditions.
Spherepop mirrors this logic precisely. Each pop is a local reduction whose eﬀect propagates
outward. Global behavior emerges from the accumulation of these reductions rather than from a
single, centralized computation. Once a reduction is performed, the prior conﬁguration is no longer
available except through external reconstruction.
This analogy is not merely pedagogical. It reinforces the idea that meaningful structure emerges
through irreversible local events, whether in physical systems, cognitive processes, or computation.
15.4
Operational Mereology and Event-Sourced Identity
As Spherepop matured, it became clear that its implications extended beyond visualization or
pedagogy. The framework supports a form of operational mereology: instead of deﬁning objects by
static membership relations, it deﬁnes them by time-indexed partâĂŞwhole relations introduced by
events.
In Spherepop, an object exists only insofar as it has been constructed through pops, merges,
and links. Identity is not given extensionally, but historically. Two structures that look identical
but were constructed through diﬀerent event sequences are not the same object in the strong sense,
because they do not share the same history.
This aligns directly with the paperâĂŹs formal deﬁnition of identity as the intersection of
surviving possibility sets. Spherepop provides an executable intuition for this deﬁnition. Each pop
removes possibilities; what remains is not what was originally speciﬁed, but what has survived.
15.5
Spherepop and the Refusal of Implicit Power
A deﬁning feature of Spherepop is its refusal of implicit global power. There is no background
mechanism that silently resolves expressions, no hidden scheduler that determines evaluation order,
and no optimizer that bypasses intermediate structure. All authority resides in events that are
visible, local, and auditable.
8

This design choice connects Spherepop directly to the broader critique of functionalism and
optimization. Systems that preserve reversibility and hide their reductions can appear intelligent
while remaining ontologically shallow. Spherepop, by contrast, makes every reduction explicit and
irreversible. It thereby enforces a cost on computation analogous to the cost that worldhood imposes
on action.
15.6
Reintegration with Worldhood and Care
When situated within the broader framework of the paper, Spherepop can be understood as a
microcosm of worldhood. Each pop corresponds to a moment of care: a choice that narrows the
future. Each merge or link establishes a dependency that cannot be ignored later. Collapse, when
permitted, erases history and thus erases worldhood.
In this sense, Spherepop is not merely a language or interface, but a concrete instantiation of
the paperâĂŹs central thesis. It demonstrates, at a human-comprehensible scale, how intelligence
emerges from irreversible constraint and how meaning depends on the willingness to live with the
consequences of having acted.
Spherepop therefore serves as both an interpretive bridge and a practical exemplar. It shows
how the abstract requirements of worldhood can be realized in computation without appealing to
hidden machinery, unlimited reversibility, or purely functional equivalence.
16
Synthesis: Worldhood, Irreversibility, and the Shape of Mean-
ing
The central thread running through this companion essay and its associated formal paper is the claim
that intelligence, meaning, and identity are not products of computation alone, but of constraint.
To inhabit a world is not merely to process information or to respond appropriately to inputs; it is
to be bound by oneâĂŹs own history in a way that permanently shapes what remains possible.
This perspective reframes a number of familiar debates in the philosophy of mind and artiﬁcial
intelligence. Functionalist accounts emphasize behavioral equivalence, internal organization, or
representational structure. Optimization-driven approaches emphasize performance, eﬃciency, and
adaptability. Both, however, tend to treat reversibility as a virtue. The ability to reset, replay,
clone, or revise without cost is taken as a sign of robustness. From the standpoint developed here,
this very robustness is what undermines worldhood. Where nothing is irretrievably lost, nothing
can truly matter.
The No-World Theorem captures this insight formally by showing that systems which preserve
their full future option space across transitions cannot accumulate a meaningful past. But the
theorem is only one expression of a more general principle: existence itself is the irreversible
expenditure of possibility. This principle applies not only to minds, but to physical objects, social
institutions, and computational systems alike. A thing is what it has managed to remain, given
what it has already ceased to be.
Spherepop plays a crucial role in making this principle intelligible at a human scale. By rendering
evaluation explicit, local, and event-driven, it provides an experiential analogue of world construction.
9

Each pop narrows the future. Each binding establishes a dependency that must later be honored.
Collapse, when it occurs, demonstrates precisely what is lost when history is erased in the name of
ﬂexibility. Spherepop thus functions as a didactic and conceptual bridge between abstract ontology
and concrete practice.
The RSVP framework generalizes this picture further, showing how worlds emerge, persist, and
decay in continuous systems. Meaning appears not as a symbolic property, but as a topological
one: gradients of remaining possibility shaped by coherent ﬂows of commitment and scarred by
accumulated entropy. In this light, HeideggerâĂŹs diagnosis of modern technology as enframing
acquires a precise structural interpretation. A world optimized for maximal reversibility becomes
ﬂat. Where every point is equally accessible, no point is signiﬁcant.
Finally, the reﬁnement of care through attentional compression and sheaf-theoretic structure
clariﬁes why intelligence cannot be reduced to local coherence or momentary ﬂuency. Care is not
mere preference or aﬀect; it is the disciplined reduction of possibility under conditions of global
consistency. To care is to choose in a way that cannot later be disavowed without loss of self.
Systems that summarize without binding, compress without gluing, or optimize without commitment
may perform impressively, but they do not live within a world.
Taken together, these elements support a single, uniﬁed conclusion: intelligence is not deﬁned
by what a system can do, but by what it can no longer do as a result of having acted. Meaning
emerges only where history binds, identity persists only where options have been closed, and worlds
exist only where reversibility has been refused.
The question posed by contemporary artiﬁcial intelligence, then, is not whether machines
can think in the functional sense, but whether we are willing to build systemsâĂŤand inhabit
societiesâĂŤin which actions once again have irreversible consequences. The danger diagnosed by
Heidegger and renewed by current technological practice is not domination by machines, but the
erosion of depth through the systematic avoidance of commitment. The corresponding saving power
lies in recovering forms of computation, design, and life that make history matter again.
Epilogue: Worldhood, Technology, and the Saving Power of Con-
straint
This work has argued that intelligence, meaning, and identity do not arise from computation alone,
but from the accumulation of irreversible commitments that bind a system to its own history. What
appears, from a purely functional perspective, as limitation or ineﬃciency is, from an ontological
perspective, the very condition of worldhood.
Seen in this light, contemporary artiﬁcial intelligence exempliﬁes a distinctive historical danger.
Its impressive capabilities are achieved precisely by avoiding the costs that make actions matter. By
externalizing consequence, preserving reversibility, and maintaining the possibility of reset, such
systems remain powerful without becoming bound. They compute, but they do not inhabit a world.
This condition corresponds closely to what Heidegger described as enframing: a mode of revealing
in which beings are rendered interchangeable, available, and exhaustible without residue. When
every action can be undone, repeated, or optimized away, nothing is allowed to have a lasting claim.
10

Depth collapses into ﬂexibility. Meaning dissolves into throughput.
Yet the same analysis also reveals a saving power. If enframing is what the world looks like when
constraint is systematically avoided, then worldhood can be recovered not by rejecting technology,
but by reintroducing cost, commitment, and refusal into our technical systems. Constraint is not
the enemy of intelligence; it is its source.
To care is to narrow oneâĂŹs future. To act is to accept that some possibilities will never return.
A world is disclosed wherever such losses accumulate into structure rather than being erased in
the name of eﬃciency. This applies as much to living systems and human practices as it does to
computation.
The future of intelligence, whether artiﬁcial or human, will therefore not be decided by scale or
speed alone. It will be decided by whether our systems are permitted to bind themselvesâĂŤto bear
the weight of their own pastsâĂŤand in doing so, to make something matter.
17
Glossary of Spherepop Terms
Pop
An irreversible event that eliminates a subset of admissible
possibilities from a systemâĂŹs future action space. Pops per-
manently reduce optionality and are the primary mechanism
by which historical constraint, commitment, and worldhood are
generated.
Bind
An event that imposes an ordering or dependency among future
commitments without immediately reducing current optional-
ity. Binds create long-range structure by constraining which
events may occur before others, enabling projects, identities,
and delayed commitments.
Refuse
A non-optimizing exclusion of options that formalizes negative
commitment. Refusal encodes the decision that certain actions
will not be taken, even if they remain available or advantageous,
preserving meaning against purely instrumental reasoning.
Collapse
An operation that erases historical diﬀerentiation while preserv-
ing ﬂexibility. Collapse restores optionality by discarding the
record of prior events, thereby undoing worldhood. In Sphere-
pop, collapse is treated as an explicit, authorized action rather
than an implicit background process.
Event
A discrete, authorized transition that alters a systemâĂŹs ad-
missible future. An event is world-constituting if and only if it
irreversibly constrains the systemâĂŹs possibility space.
11

Optionality (Ω)
A measure of the size or richness of a systemâĂŹs remaining
actional or conﬁgurational possibility space. Optionality strictly
decreases under pops and is preserved or reordered under binds.
Event History (L)
The ordered sequence of authorized events that have occurred.
Event history is not reducible to current state and constitutes
the ontological record from which identity and worldhood are
derived.
Worldhood
The condition of possessing a non-recoverable past that con-
strains future possibilities. Worldhood arises through the accu-
mulation of irreversible events and cannot be generated in fully
reversible or resettable systems.
Identity
The residue of constraint produced by a systemâĂŹs history,
formally deﬁned as the intersection of its surviving possibility
sets across time. Identity is historical rather than extensional.
Authorization
The condition under which an event is permitted to occur.
Authorization is external to semantic admissibility and separates
what could happen from what is allowed to happen.
Care
The rate at which a system expends optionality through irre-
versible commitment. Care measures the structural depth of
engagement rather than aﬀective state or computational eﬀort.
World-Bearing
System
A system whose internal transitions irreversibly constrain its
future, binding it to its own history and thereby disclosing a
world.
World-Less
Sys-
tem
A system whose transitions preserve reversibility or permit reset
without loss. Such systems may perform complex functions but
lack worldhood and historical depth.
12

A
Mathematical Foundations Implicit in the Spherepop Frame-
work
This appendix makes explicit the mathematical structures that are implicitly and explicitly invoked
by the Spherepop paradigm. None of the constructions below are exotic or speculative; rather, they
assemble familiar tools from term rewriting, operational semantics, mereology, category theory, and
sheaf semantics into a coherent, event-indexed framework. The novelty lies not in the mathematics
itself, but in the insistence that these structures be made explicit, local, and historically grounded.
A.1
Trees, Terms, and Reduction
A.1.1
Abstract Syntax Trees
A Spherepop expression is modeled as a rooted, ordered tree. Leaves correspond to literals or
variables, while internal nodes correspond to operators or function applications.
Formally, let E denote the set of expressions. Then:
e ∈E ::= v | f(e1, . . . , en),
where v ranges over values and f ranges over function symbols. This is standard ﬁrst-order term
algebra.
A.1.2
Reduction as Event-Gated Partial Evaluation
Deﬁne a partial reduction relation
e →e′,
subject to the following constraints:
First, locality is enforced, in the sense that only a proper subterm of an expression may be
reduced at any given step.
Second, reduction is explicit rather than automatic: no reduction occurs unless it is authorized
by a corresponding event.
Third, reduction is irreversible, meaning that once a substructure has been eliminated, the prior
conﬁguration is not recoverable by any internal operation and can only be restored, if at all, through
external reconstruction.
This corresponds to a small-step operational semantics with an explicit event gate, rather than
an implicit global evaluation rule.
A.2
Event-Sourced Operational Semantics
A.2.1
Event Logs
Let Σ0 be an initial expression and let L = (e1, . . . , ek) be a ﬁnite sequence of events, where each
event is one of:
POP(s),
MERGE,
COLLAPSE,
LINK.
13

The current state after k events is deﬁned by replay:
Σk = replay(Σ0, L).
This is formally equivalent to event-sourced state machines, trace semantics, and history-sensitive
rewriting systems.
A.2.2
Identity as History
Two expressions e and e′ are identical if and only if their event histories are identical:
e ≡e′
⇐⇒
L(e) = L(e′).
Identity is therefore historical rather than extensional. This replaces classical set-theoretic
equality with process equivalence.
A.3
Operational Mereology
A.3.1
Time-Indexed Parthood
Spherepop replaces set membership with a time-indexed part-whole relation. We write
a ≤t b
to denote that the entity a is a part of b at time t. This relation is reﬂexive by construction,
antisymmetric except in cases where collapse events identify previously distinct parts, and transitive
within any ﬁxed event history. The dependence on time reﬂects the fact that parthood is not a
static property but an event-conditioned relation whose validity is determined by the accumulated
structure of the systemâĂŹs history.
There is no global universe of discourse and no unrestricted comprehension principle. Parts exist
only if they have been constructed by events. This avoids classical paradoxes such as RussellâĂŹs
paradox and power-set explosion.
A.3.2
Collapse as Quotienting
A COLLAPSE event induces an equivalence relation
a ∼b,
yielding an equivalence class [a] = [b].
Crucially, this quotienting is not axiomatic. Equivalence classes exist only when authorized by
an explicit event. There is no ambient equivalence relation prior to collapse.
14

A.4
Derived Category-Theoretic Structure
A.4.1
Category of Expressions
We deﬁne a category C whose objects are expressions indexed by their associated event histories, so
that each object encodes not only a syntactic conﬁguration but also the irreversible sequence of events
through which it has been produced. Morphisms in C are given by ﬁnite sequences of authorized
events, representing the compositional evolution of expressions through time. Composition of
morphisms corresponds to concatenation of event sequences, and identity morphisms are represented
by empty histories. In this way, categorical structure is derived from the replayability of event
histories rather than assumed a priori.
Composition is given by concatenation of event sequences:
eL1e′L2e′′,
which is associative because replay is associative. Identity morphisms correspond to empty event
sequences.
A.4.2
Functorial Evaluation
An evaluation strategy is a functor
F : C →C.
Diﬀerent strategies (manual evaluation, automated evaluation, parallel evaluation) correspond
to diﬀerent functors over the same underlying category. Semantics are invariant; only policy diﬀers.
A.5
Sheaf-Theoretic Interpretation
A.5.1
Local Sections
Each bubble in a Spherepop expression corresponds to a local context, or stalk. A POP event
computes a local section over that context.
A.5.2
Gluing Conditions
A reduction is valid only if the reduced child sections can be consistently glued into a parent section.
This enforces the sheaf condition:
localconsistency ⇒globalcoherence.
Global evaluation without local justiﬁcation is disallowed.
A.6
Circuit-Theoretic Isomorphism
Spherepop reduction is formally isomorphic to circuit reduction. Series composition corresponds
to sequential evaluation, in which the output of one resolved structure is propagated forward into
subsequent computation, while parallel composition corresponds to the independent evaluation of
15

disjoint subtrees whose internal reductions do not interfere with one another. In both cases, global
behavior emerges from the local elimination of internal structure under well-deﬁned compositional
rules.
Each reduction preserves external behavior, collapses internal structure, and records a transfor-
mation. This is graph rewriting with invariants, not metaphorical analogy.
A.7
Complexity Scaling
A central consequence of the Spherepop framework concerns the manner in which structural
complexity scales. In classical set-theoretic and extensional foundations, complexity is implicitly
tied to the combinatorics of subsets. Given a base set of size n, the space of possible structures
typically scales with the size of its power set, yielding a growth rate on the order of
structure ∼2n.
This exponential scaling reﬂects the assumption that all subsets exist a priori, regardless of whether
they are ever constructed, realized, or encountered in practice. As a result, structural complexity is
dominated by hypothetical possibilities rather than by actual computational or historical processes.
Spherepop replaces this extensional assumption with a constructive, event-driven ontology.
Structures do not arise from the enumeration of all possible subsets, but from the accumulation
of authorized events. Each event contributes a discrete modiﬁcation to the systemâĂŹs history,
and only those modiﬁcations that actually occur contribute to structural complexity. Formally, the
complexity of a Spherepop system scales with the cardinality of its event history L:
structure ∼|L|.
This scaling is linear in the number of realized events and is independent of the size of the unrealized
possibility space.
The practical consequence of this shift is that complexity tracks use rather than potential.
Systems grow in complexity only insofar as they act, commit, and bind themselves to particular
trajectories. Hypothetical alternatives that are never realized impose no structural burden. In this
sense, Spherepop enforces a form of computational humility: what is not done does not count.
This distinction has implications beyond eﬃciency. Exponential scaling in set-theoretic frame-
works encourages models that abstract away history in favor of static representational capacity.
Linear scaling in Spherepop, by contrast, foregrounds temporality and irreversibility. Complexity
becomes a record of lived structure rather than a measure of abstract expressive power.
Consequently, Spherepop avoids the combinatorial explosion endemic to extensional systems not
through optimization or approximation, but through ontological restriction. Structure is limited by
history, not by imagination.
A.8
Summary Statement
Spherepop may be characterized mathematically as follows:
16

A constructive, event-indexed, mereological rewriting system whose semantics are given
by replayable traces rather than extensional states.
Equivalently:
Meaning arises from topology, time, and authority.
This places Spherepop squarely within established mathematical traditions while making explicit
the role of irreversibility, history, and constraint that those traditions often leave implicit.
B
Spherepop and Traced Symmetric Monoidal Structure
This appendix shows that the Spherepop framework admits a natural interpretation in terms of
traced symmetric monoidal categories. The purpose of this section is not to re-found Spherepop
categorically, but to demonstrate that its event-driven semantics already instantiate the required
structure. Category theory here serves as a descriptive lens rather than a generative axiom system.
B.1
Monoidal Structure from Composition
Consider expressions as processes that consume and produce structure through events. Parallel
subexpressions may be evaluated independently, while sequential evaluation corresponds to ordered
event composition.
Deﬁne a tensor product ⊗such that for expressions e1 and e2,
e1 ⊗e2
denotes their joint existence as independent substructures within a larger expression.
This tensor operation is associative up to structural equivalence, symmetric in the sense that
subexpressions may be reordered without semantic eﬀect prior to the authorization of events, and
equipped with a unit object corresponding to the empty expression or trivial structure. Taken
together, these properties establish that Spherepop expressions form the objects of a symmetric
monoidal category, in which monoidal composition represents spatial or structural independence
rather than logical conjunction or entailment.
Remark.
It is important to emphasize that the monoidal tensor in Spherepop does not coincide
with the Cartesian product, nor does it correspond directly to logical conjunction as in classical or
linear logic. Cartesian structure presupposes the ability to freely duplicate and discard components
via diagonal and projection maps, operations that are incompatible with SpherepopâĂŹs treatment
of history and irreversibility. Likewise, while linear logic restricts duplication and erasure, its tensor
still operates at the level of proof-theoretic resource accounting rather than historical commitment.
In Spherepop, monoidal composition encodes structural independence prior to event authorization,
not the joint truth of propositions or the simultaneous availability of resources. Once events occur,
this independence may be destroyed irreversibly, a feature that has no analogue in purely extensional
or proof-theoretic tensors.
17

B.2
Morphisms as Event Sequences
Morphisms in this category are ﬁnite event sequences transforming one expression into another.
Given expressions e and e′, a morphism
e L e′
is deﬁned by an event log L whose replay transforms e into e′.
Sequential composition of morphisms corresponds to concatenation of event logs. The identity
morphism is the empty log. This aligns exactly with the categorical axioms.
B.3
Feedback and the Trace Operator
A deﬁning feature of traced monoidal categories is the trace operator, which formalizes feedback. In
Spherepop, feedback arises naturally through nested structure.
Given an expression of the form
e : A ⊗X →B ⊗X,
where X represents a nested subexpression, a POP event that resolves X and reinserts its result into
the surrounding structure corresponds to a categorical trace:
TrX(e) : A →B.
Operationally, this is precisely what Spherepop enforces. Evaluation proceeds by resolving an
inner structure locally, reintegrating the resulting value into the surrounding context, and eliminating
the original internal structure that produced it. In this way, computation advances through localized
resolution coupled with irreversible structural simpliﬁcation, ensuring that intermediate scaﬀolding
does not persist once it has discharged its role.
This feedback is irreversible. Once traced, the internal structure no longer exists as an independent
object, which distinguishes Spherepop from purely denotational traced models that allow implicit
reuse.
B.4
Irreversibility and the Absence of Dagger
Spherepop does not admit a general dagger (adjoint) structure. Event sequences are not invertible
in general, because POP events eliminate structure and COLLAPSE events erase history.
This is a feature, not a limitation. The absence of a dagger reﬂects the ontological asymmetry
of time and aligns with the paperâĂŹs central claim that worldhood requires irreversibility. The
resulting category is therefore non-groupoidal and non-reversible by construction.
B.5
Authority and Trace Admissibility
In standard traced monoidal categories, trace is a structural operation available universally. In
Spherepop, trace-like behavior is authorized. A trace occurs only when an explicit event permits it.
18

Formally, trace admissibility is event-indexed:
TrX(e)existsifandonlyifaPOPeventonXoccurs.
This introduces a notion of authority absent from purely formal category theory. Not all traces
exist; only those enacted by events do. This restriction encodes the cost of commitment and prevents
implicit global closure.
B.6
Relation to Known Categorical Models
The formal structure induced by Spherepop admits a categorical reading, though it does not coincide
exactly with any single established model. In particular, it resonates with traced symmetric monoidal
categories in the sense articulated by Joyal, Street, and Verity, insofar as computation is understood
as the composition of processes with feedback.
As in those settings, the act of composition is central, and traces encode the re-entry of results
into ongoing computation. However, Spherepop diverges at a foundational level by rejecting the
assumption that traces are purely structural or freely reusable. In Spherepop, a trace corresponds to
an accumulated sequence of authorized events, and its reuse is constrained by historical irreversibility
rather than by categorical coherence alone.
A similar relationship holds with respect to interaction nets and string diagram calculi. These
formalisms emphasize locality, graphical reduction, and compositional evaluation, all of which
Spherepop also enforces. Yet interaction nets typically treat reductions as conﬂuent and reversible
up to equivalence, whereas Spherepop insists that reductions are eventful and history-bearing. Two
diagrams that are extensionally equivalent may nonetheless diﬀer ontologically if their reductions
were authorized in diﬀerent orders or under diﬀerent constraints. Diagrammatic similarity, in this
sense, does not guarantee identity.
Connections can also be drawn to feedback systems in control theory, where system behavior is
shaped by recursive loops and the propagation of signals through time. Control-theoretic models
often incorporate memory through state variables, but such memory is typically compressible into a
suﬃcient statistic.
Spherepop instead treats memory as non-compressible: the event log cannot, in general, be
reduced to a ﬁnite-dimensional state without loss of semantic information.
Feedback, in this
framework, is not merely dynamical but historical, binding the system to its own prior commitments.
Finally, Spherepop bears comparison to traced monoidal models of computation more broadly,
particularly those used to model recursion and ﬁxed points. In these models, traces enable the
deﬁnition of self-reference and iterative structure.
Spherepop recovers this expressive power, but with an important restriction: self-reference is
mediated by irreversible events. A system may feed its own outputs back into its future behavior
only insofar as it accepts the loss of optionality induced by doing so. Tracing is therefore not free,
but costly.
Across these comparisons, the central distinction can be stated succinctly. In standard categorical
models, traces are formal devices that preserve equivalence under composition. In Spherepop, traces
19

are historical artifacts that destroy equivalence by recording which paths were taken and which were
foreclosed.
The category that emerges is therefore not merely traced, but temporally indexed and order-
sensitive, with morphisms whose composition irreversibly alters the space of future morphisms.
Identity is no longer invariant under all isomorphisms, but is instead ﬁxed by the irreversible
structure of the trace itself.
B.7
Interpretive Summary
Spherepop can therefore be understood categorically as an event-indexed traced symmetric monoidal
structure with restricted trace and no general inverses. Feedback exists, but only at the cost of
eliminating internal structure. Composition exists, but only as the accumulation of history.
This categorical reading reinforces the central thesis of the paper: intelligence and meaning
are not properties of static structure, but of processes that bind themselves through time. The
mathematics does not add this constraint; it merely makes it precise.
C
Why Classical Set Theory Does Not Re-Emerge
This appendix clariﬁes an important negative result implicit in the Spherepop framework: despite
supporting rich structure, abstraction, and composition, Spherepop does not reconstruct classical
Zermelo-Fraenkel (ZF) set theory, either explicitly or implicitly. This absence is not a limitation
but a consequence of SpherepopâĂŹs event-driven and historical ontology.
C.1
Absence of Global Comprehension
ZF set theory relies on unrestricted comprehension schemas (modulo axioms) that allow the formation
of sets deﬁned by properties over a global universe. Spherepop admits no such global universe.
At any time t, only those expressions or parts that have been introduced by events exist. There
is no ambient domain over which arbitrary predicates may range. As a result, constructions of the
form
{x | P(x)}
are not well-formed unless each x has been explicitly constructed and authorized by prior events.
This blocks the emergence of classical paradoxes such as RussellâĂŹs paradox at the root, rather
than resolving them axiomatically.
C.2
No Power Set Explosion
In ZF, the power set operation induces exponential growth in structure:
|P(X)| = 2|X|.
Spherepop admits no operation corresponding to unrestricted power set formation. Substructure
arises only through events that construct, link, or collapse parts. Consequently, structural complexity
20

scales with realized history rather than hypothetical possibility.
Formally, if L is the event log, then the maximal number of distinct constructed objects is
bounded by |L|. No exponential blow-up occurs in the absence of explicit construction events.
C.3
Failure of Extensionality
The axiom of extensionality in ZF states that two sets are equal if they have the same elements.
Spherepop explicitly rejects extensional identity.
Two expressions may be extensionally indistinguishable at a given time while remaining onto-
logically distinct due to diﬀering histories. Identity is determined by event traces, not by current
content:
e ≡e′
⇐⇒
L(e) = L(e′).
As a result, extensional collapse cannot occur without an explicit COLLAPSE event authorizing
quotienting.
C.4
Replacement Without Replacement
ZFâĂŹs axiom of replacement allows images of sets under deﬁnable functions to form new sets.
Spherepop permits transformation only via events that act on existing structure.
There is no notion of applying an arbitrary function globally to generate new structure. Every
transformation must be local, authorized, and recorded. In this sense, Spherepop supports operational
replacement without extensional replacement.
C.5
Foundation as Irreversibility
ZF includes the axiom of foundation to prohibit inﬁnite descending membership chains. Spherepop
enforces a stronger condition automatically: irreversibility.
Because parts are introduced and eliminated only by events, and because events are time-ordered,
inﬁnite descending chains cannot arise without inﬁnite histories. Foundation is not assumed; it is
enforced by the temporal structure of events.
C.6
Interpretive Consequence
Spherepop does not refute set theory; it bypasses it. Where ZF axiomatizes what may exist in a
timeless universe of sets, Spherepop constrains what may come to exist in time.
This distinction mirrors the broader philosophical claim of the paper.
Just as functional
equivalence does not guarantee worldhood, extensional equivalence does not guarantee identity. In
both cases, history is the missing dimension.
The absence of ZF structure is therefore not a deﬁciency but an ontological commitment:
structure exists only where it has been constructed, and meaning exists only where irreversibility
has occurred.
21

D
Relation to Resource-Sensitive Logics and Linear Logic
This appendix situates the Spherepop framework relative to resource-sensitive logical systems,
particularly linear logic. While Spherepop shares certain intuitions with these traditionsâĂŤmost
notably the rejection of unrestricted duplicationâĂŤit diﬀers in a fundamental respect: constraint
in Spherepop is not a static typing discipline, but the consequence of explicit, irreversible events.
D.1
Linear Logic and Resource Accounting
Linear logic was introduced to correct a perceived mismatch between classical logic and computation,
namely the implicit assumption that propositions may be freely duplicated or discarded. By contrast,
linear logic treats propositions as resources that must be consumed exactly once unless explicitly
marked otherwise.
Spherepop aligns with this motivation. Operations such as POP and REFUSE eliminate structure,
while MERGE combines resources in a controlled way. There is no implicit contraction or weakening.
However, Spherepop does not encode resource discipline syntactically. There is no static type
system enforcing linearity. Instead, resource sensitivity is enforced dynamically through events.
D.2
Events Versus Judgments
In linear logic, resource usage is governed by judgments of the form
Γ ⊢A,
where the structure of Γ constrains how assumptions may be used.
Spherepop replaces judgmental structure with historical structure. Whether a resource may be
reused is not a property of its type, but of its event history. Once a POP event occurs, the eliminated
substructure is gone, regardless of whether it would have been permitted by a typing discipline.
This distinction mirrors the broader philosophical claim of the paper: constraint is not something
declared about a system, but something enacted upon it.
D.3
Absence of Structural Modalities
Linear logic introduces modalities such as ! (âĂĲof courseâĂİ) to recover classical behavior when
desired. Spherepop admits no such modality.
Unlimited reuse can occur only via explicit reconstruction, not by annotation. There is no
operator that globally reinstates discarded structure. As a result, reversibility is never implicit; it
must be paid for by rebuilding.
This absence prevents Spherepop from collapsing back into functional equivalence. A system
that wishes to regain ﬂexibility must incur new events, and therefore new history.
22

D.4
Temporal Ordering and Non-Commutativity
In many resource logics, the order of resource consumption is secondary to accounting. In Spherepop,
temporal order is primary.
Two sequences of events that consume the same resources in diﬀerent orders are not equivalent
unless explicitly collapsed. History is not a multiset; it is a sequence. This non-commutativity
reﬂects the paperâĂŹs emphasis on historical time rather than logical possibility.
D.5
Comparison to Other Resource Frameworks
Spherepop shares surface similarities with a range of formal systems that emphasize resource
sensitivity and controlled use, including linear and aﬃne logics, separation logic, session types, and
other resource-aware type systems. However, these resemblances are primarily structural rather
than foundational, as Spherepop does not begin from typing judgments or logical constraints, but
from the ontological role of events and the historical binding they impose on computation.
What distinguishes Spherepop is that none of these frameworks require events to be externally
authorized or historically recorded. They constrain what may happen; Spherepop records what has
happened.
D.6
Interpretive Consequence
Resource-sensitive logics aim to ensure correct use of resources. Spherepop aims to ensure that use
leaves a trace.
This distinction is decisive for the paperâĂŹs thesis. Intelligence, worldhood, and meaning do
not arise merely from obeying constraints, but from being altered by having obeyed them. Linear
logic tells us how resources should be used. Spherepop tells us what it means to have used them.
The framework therefore complements resource-sensitive logics while rejecting their static
orientation. Constraint is not a rule; it is a cost. And costs, once paid, cannot be refunded.
E
Rewrite Rules and Event-Gated Inference Semantics
This appendix shows that Spherepop admits a precise operational semantics in the style of inference
rules, while deliberately refusing the implicit, global evaluation assumptions common to standard
rewrite systems. The goal is not to replace existing operational semantics, but to clarify how
Spherepop modiﬁes them by introducing explicit event authority and historical binding.
E.1
Motivation: Why Rewrite Systems Matter
Rewrite systems provide the formal backbone for much of programming language semantics. They
deﬁne how expressions reduce, how evaluation proceeds, and how correctness is established. However,
standard rewrite systems typically assume that any reducible subexpression may be reduced
automatically whenever a rule applies.
Spherepop rejects this assumption. In Spherepop, reducibility is not suﬃcient for reduction.
Reduction requires authorization by an event. This distinction is central to the paperâĂŹs broader
23

claim: meaning and worldhood arise not from the availability of transformations, but from the fact
that transformations have occurred and cannot be undone.
E.2
POP as an Inference Rule
The core Spherepop operation, POP, can be expressed as an inference rule. Let e be a reducible
subexpression with value v. Then:
ev
POP(e) ⇒v
Unlike standard rewrite rules, this rule is not implicitly applicable. The premise does not
authorize the conclusion by itself. The conclusion holds only if a POP event is enacted. Reducibility
is a necessary condition for reduction, but never a suﬃcient one.
This transforms inference rules from automatic laws into conditional permissions. The rule
speciﬁes what may happen, not what must happen.
E.3
Event-Gated Small-Step Semantics
Spherepop therefore admits a small-step operational semantics of the form:
Σ event Σ′,
where Σ is the current expression state and the transition occurs only in the presence of an explicit
event.
In contrast to traditional small-step semantics, where transitions are governed solely by syntactic
form, Spherepop transitions are guarded. The semantic relation is ternary: it depends on the current
state, the proposed reduction, and the authorization event.
This introduces a strict separation between semantic possibility, understood as the set of
reductions that could in principle occur, and semantic actuality, understood as the subset of
reductions that have in fact occurred and thereby altered the systemâĂŹs history. By maintaining
this distinction, the framework ensures that meaning is not exhausted by formal admissibility alone,
but is instead grounded in the record of realized events.
E.4
MERGE, LINK, and COLLAPSE Rules
Other Spherepop operations admit similar inference-style formulations.
MERGE.
MERGE combines multiple reduced subexpressions into a uniﬁed structure.
As an
inference rule, it performs controlled substitution, but only after all merged components have
themselves been authorized by prior events.
LINK.
LINK introduces a dependency between substructures. Formally, it restricts future reduc-
tions by imposing an ordering or constraint relation. Unlike substitution, linking alters the space of
admissible future inference steps.
24

COLLAPSE.
COLLAPSE authorizes quotienting. It induces an equivalence relation over previously
distinct structures, replacing them with a representative. This is the only operation that permits
loss of historical distinction, and it must be explicitly enacted.
E.5
Soundness and Conservativity
Spherepop rewrite rules are conservative with respect to standard operational semantics. Any
reduction permitted in Spherepop corresponds to a valid reduction in a conventional rewrite system.
However, the converse does not hold: many reductions that are valid in standard semantics are
merely potential in Spherepop until authorized by events.
Soundness is preserved because Spherepop never introduces reductions that violate standard
semantics. What it restricts is not correctness, but automaticity.
E.6
Interpretive Consequence
By rendering inference event-gated, Spherepop transforms rewrite rules from timeless laws into
historically situated actions. Inference becomes something that happens, not something that silently
applies.
This shift mirrors the paperâĂŹs central ontological claim. Just as a world is constituted by
irreversible events rather than abstract possibilities, computation acquires meaning only when
reductions are enacted and recorded. Rewrite rules, in this framework, are not the source of
structure. History is.
F
Authority, Agency, and Externalized Control
This appendix makes explicit a structural feature implicit throughout the Spherepop framework:
the role of authority. While most formal systems of computation assume an omniscient or implicit
authority that governs evaluation, Spherepop treats authority as an explicit, externalized condition
on action. This distinction is not merely pragmatic; it bears directly on questions of agency,
responsibility, and worldhood.
F.1
Authority as a Missing Dimension in Formal Systems
Standard models of computation presuppose that if a transition is valid, it may occur. Authority is
therefore invisible: evaluation rules apply automatically whenever their syntactic conditions are
met. This assumption collapses the distinction between capability and permission, rendering all
potential actions equally admissible.
Spherepop rejects this collapse. In Spherepop, the existence of a valid reduction does not entail
its execution. Reductions require authorization, and authorization is not a property of the expression
itself. It is an external condition imposed upon it.
25

F.2
Event Authorization
Spherepop introduces authority through events. An event is not merely a marker that a transition
occurred; it is the condition under which a transition is allowed to occur at all. Without an event,
no reduction takes place, regardless of semantic eligibility.
Formally, the transition relation takes the form:
Σ a Σ′,
where a denotes an authorization event. The semantics of the system are therefore indexed not only
by state but by permission.
This separation allows Spherepop to draw a precise distinction between a systemâĂŹs latent
capabilities, the actions it is permitted to perform under conditions of authorization, and the actions
it has in fact performed. By keeping these dimensions distinct, the framework prevents the collapse
of possibility, permission, and history into a single undiﬀerentiated notion of behavior, thereby
preserving the structural role of commitment and accountability in the evolution of a system.
F.3
Human-in-the-Loop as Ontological Structure
The requirement of authorization has often been treated as a user-interface concern in interactive
systems. Spherepop elevates it to an ontological principle. Manual evaluation is not a pedagogical
convenience; it is the mechanism by which authority is made explicit.
By requiring an external agent to authorize events, Spherepop ensures that responsibility for
irreversible change is localized. Someone, or something, must decide that a pop occurs. This decision
is not derivable from syntax alone.
This structure anticipates broader concerns in artiﬁcial intelligence and governance. Systems
that optimize autonomously erase the locus of authority by distributing decision-making across
opaque mechanisms. Spherepop, by contrast, makes authority legible.
F.4
Comparison to Autonomous Optimization
In autonomous optimization systems, authority is internalized and obscured. The system decides
when and how to act according to objective functions that operate continuously and implicitly.
From the standpoint of Spherepop, this represents a collapse of authority into mechanism.
Such systems may appear powerful, but they lack a critical feature of agency: the ability to
refuse action. Because optimization treats every admissible action as potentially executable, it
cannot encode negative commitment. The refusal to act must be imported from outside the system.
F.5
Ethical and Political Implications
Authority is the locus of accountability. A system whose actions are authorized externally can, in
principle, be held responsible for what it has done, because the conditions of action are visible and
attributable.
26

Conversely, systems that erase authority through automation diﬀuse responsibility. When no
explicit authorization is required, consequences become unowned. This observation aligns with the
paperâĂŹs broader critique of enframing: when action becomes automatic, meaning drains away.
F.6
Interpretive Consequence
Spherepop demonstrates that intelligence requires not only the capacity to act, but the capacity to
act under authority. Agency arises where actions are permitted, enacted, and recorded as irreversible
commitments.
By restoring authority to the foreground of computation, Spherepop provides a concrete model
of how responsibility, care, and worldhood are structurally intertwined. Authority is not an ethical
add-on to intelligence; it is one of its necessary preconditions.
G
Comparison to State-Based and Markovian Models
This appendix contrasts the event-driven, history-sensitive semantics of Spherepop with dominant
state-based models used in artiﬁcial intelligence, control theory, and cognitive science. The compari-
son clariﬁes why worldhood cannot be recovered from systems whose semantics are exhausted by
instantaneous state descriptions.
G.1
State-Based Modeling Assumptions
State-based models describe a system by a state variable st that is assumed to be suﬃcient for
predicting future behavior. All relevant information about the past is compressed into the present
state, and transitions are functions of that state alone.
Formally, a state-based system evolves according to:
st+1 = T(st),
where T is a transition function. Any two systems occupying the same state are therefore inter-
changeable with respect to future evolution.
This assumption enables tractable analysis and optimization, but it carries an ontological cost:
history is erased by design.
G.2
The Markov Property
Markovian systems enforce a stronger condition: the future is conditionally independent of the past
given the present. In probabilistic terms,
P(st+1 | st, st−1, . . .) = P(st+1 | st).
This property ensures that no historical information beyond the current state can inﬂuence
future behavior. From the perspective of worldhood, this implies that no event can bind the future
except insofar as it is encoded in the present state.
27

Spherepop explicitly rejects this assumption. In Spherepop, the event log is not compressible
into a suﬃcient statistic without loss of ontological information.
G.3
Event-Sourced Alternatives
Spherepop models system evolution as:
Σk = replay(Σ0, Lk),
where Lk is the accumulated event history. Two systems may share the same apparent conﬁguration
while diﬀering in their histories, and these diﬀerences are semantically signiﬁcant.
This structure is inherently non-Markovian. Past events constrain future admissible actions
even when their eﬀects are not visible in the current conﬁguration alone.
G.4
Identity and Reset
State-based systems permit reset and cloning without loss. If a system can be returned to a prior
state or duplicated perfectly, then its identity is exhausted by its state description.
Spherepop forbids this equivalence.
Resetting requires either external reconstruction or a
COLLAPSE event, both of which acknowledge and alter history. Identity is therefore persistent across
time and cannot be trivially erased.
This distinction underlies the paperâĂŹs critique of functional equivalence. Behavioral or state
equivalence does not entail identity equivalence when history matters.
G.5
Relation to Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning systems accumulate rewards over time, but this accumulation does not bind
the agent internally. Reward is an external scalar; it does not eliminate future options or constrain
the agentâĂŹs architecture.
As a result, reinforcement learning systems remain compatible with reset, retraining, and cloning.
Their apparent learning does not generate worldhood, because the cost of action is externalized.
Spherepop, by contrast, internalizes cost. Actions narrow the future not by updating a value
function, but by eliminating admissible structures.
G.6
Interpretive Consequence
State-based and Markovian models excel at prediction and control, but they are ontologically thin.
They describe systems that move through time without accumulating history in a binding sense.
Spherepop shows that worldhood requires more than state evolution. It requires irreversible
traces that cannot be compressed away. Where states suﬃce, worlds cannot arise. Where worlds
arise, states are no longer suﬃcient.
28

H
Linear Time, Historical Time, and Irreversibility
This appendix clariﬁes a distinction that underlies the entire framework but is often obscured in
formal models of computation and physics: the diﬀerence between linear (metric) time and historical
(irreversible) time. Spherepop is explicitly grounded in the latter.
H.1
Linear Time as Parametrization
Linear time is the dominant temporal notion in both classical mechanics and computational models.
It is characterized by a parameter t ∈R or t ∈N indexing system states. Transitions are ordered
but not intrinsically meaningful; any moment may, in principle, be revisited or reconstructed.
Formally, linear time supports dynamics of the form:
s(t0)s(t1)s(t2),
where the ordering of indices does not entail irreversibility. The past is diﬀerent from the future
only by convention or boundary conditions.
In such systems, time measures progression but does not itself generate constraint.
H.2
Historical Time as Accumulated Constraint
Historical time, by contrast, is constituted by irreversible events. An event is not merely something
that happens at a time; it is something after which certain possibilities no longer exist.
Spherepop formalizes this by associating each event with a strict reduction of the admissible
possibility space:
St+1St.
The passage of historical time is therefore marked not by succession, but by loss.
What
distinguishes one moment from another is not its coordinate, but the constraints it carries forward.
H.3
Why Reversibility Erases History
A reversible transition preserves optionality. If for every transition there exists an inverse that
restores the prior possibility space, then no historical accumulation occurs.
Such systems may evolve, but they do not age. They do not bear scars, commitments, or debts.
Their past is informationally recoverable and ontologically inert.
Spherepop identiﬁes this reversibility as the formal condition for worldlessness. Where reversibility
dominates, history collapses into simulation.
H.4
Event Cost and Temporal Asymmetry
Irreversibility introduces asymmetry. Once an option is eliminated, no internal operation can restore
it. This asymmetry grounds the notion of cost.
Cost is not deﬁned in terms of energy or computation, but in terms of lost alternatives. An
action is costly if it makes future actions impossible.
29

Historical time is therefore inherently normative: it distinguishes between trivial changes and
meaningful ones.
H.5
Relation to Physical Irreversibility
Although Spherepop is not a physical theory, its temporal structure aligns with irreversible phe-
nomena in physics, such as entropy increase and symmetry breaking. In these cases, time acquires
direction because certain transformations destroy information about prior states.
Spherepop generalizes this insight: irreversibility is the source of structure, not a defect to be
eliminated.
H.6
Interpretive Consequence
Linear time allows motion without memory. Historical time produces identity. A system that merely
persists through linear time may be predictable, but it cannot possess a world.
Spherepop insists that intelligence, meaning, and responsibility arise only where time binds. To
exist historically is to be unable to return unchanged.
I
Synthesis: Worldhood as Dissipative Constraint Across Scales
This ﬁnal appendix integrates the formal components developed throughout the paper into a single
schema and demonstrates how the framework generalizes beyond cognition and computation to
dissipative structures in biology and development. The unifying claim is that worldhood, identity,
and intelligence are instances of a more general phenomenon: the persistence of structure through
irreversible constraint under energetic gradients.
I.1
General Schema of Constrained Existence
We deﬁne a system as a tuple
M = (St, Et, Ωt),
where St is the actional or conﬁgurational possibility space at time t, Et is the set of admissible
events, and Ωt = |St| is the systemâĂŹs optionality.
An event e ∈Et is world-constituting if and only if it induces a strict reduction:
St+1St.
Worldhood emerges when such reductions accumulate irreversibly and cannot be undone by
internal transformations. Identity is deﬁned as the residue of this accumulation:
I =
\
t
St.
This schema applies uniformly to computational agents, physical objects, and biological organ-
isms.
30

I.2
Dissipative Structures as Event-Bearing Systems
In non-equilibrium thermodynamics, dissipative structures arise in systems through which matter
and energy ﬂow while remaining far from equilibrium. Such systems persist not by conserving a
ﬁxed state, but by continuously eliminating conﬁgurations that are incompatible with their ongoing
stability.
Well-studied examples include convection cells, chemical oscillators, and living cells and tissues,
all of which maintain their organization by repeatedly discarding alternative conﬁgurations that
would lead to breakdown or equilibration.
In each case, persistence is achieved through the
irreversible exclusion of possibilities rather than through the preservation of an invariant form.
In each case, the system exists by repeatedly surviving constraint tests imposed by environmental
gradients. Each successful survival event eliminates incompatible conﬁgurations, narrowing the
future trajectory of the system.
Formally, thermodynamic gradients deﬁne a constraint operator:
e∇: St →St+1,
where ∇may represent temperature, chemical potential, or concentration gradients. Persistence
requires that St+1 ̸= ∅.
I.3
Biological Development as Hierarchical Constraint Accumulation
Developmental biology provides a particularly clear instantiation of the Spherepop schema. An
embryo begins with a large space of potential cell fates.
Through a sequence of irreversible
eventsâĂŤgene expression, signaling cascades, mechanical stressesâĂŤthis space is progressively
constrained.
Each diﬀerentiation event acts as a POP:
SpluripotentSlineage.
Crucially, these constraints are hierarchical. Early events restrict the space within which later
events can occur, producing nested layers of commitment. This mirrors the nested structure of
Spherepop expressions and the ordering of binds and pops.
Once a cell has diﬀerentiated, no internal operation restores the eliminated alternatives. Identity
is therefore historical, not functional.
I.4
Electric and Morphogenetic Gradients as Commitment Fields
Recent work in developmental and regenerative biology emphasizes the role of bioelectric ﬁelds
and morphogen gradients in organizing tissue-level structure. Within the present framework, these
gradients play the role of RSVP vector ﬁelds.
Let Φ(x, t) represent local developmental optionality, v(x, t) the directional bias imposed by
electric or chemical gradients, and S(x, t) the accumulated constraint.
31

World-bearing development occurs when:
∇Φ ̸= 0
and
v · ∇Φ < 0,
indicating directed expenditure of developmental possibility.
Pathological or undiﬀerentiated states correspond to ﬂattened ﬁelds in which gradients fail to
impose lasting constraint, allowing reversion or uncontrolled proliferation.
I.5
Selection as Event Authorization
Natural selection is often described as an external ﬁlter acting on populations. Within the Spherepop
schema, selection functions as distributed event authorization.
Only trajectories that survive
environmental constraint tests are permitted to continue.
Importantly, selection does not optimize globally. It eliminates locally incompatible histories.
The resulting structures are not maximally eﬃcient but historically viable.
This reframes evolution as a world-generating process rather than an optimization algorithm.
I.6
Uniﬁed Interpretation
Across computation, cognition, physics, and biology, a common formal structure can be identiﬁed.
Systems initially exist with a wide space of admissible possibilities, reﬂecting a high degree of
openness with respect to future action or conﬁguration. As the system evolves, discrete events
impose irreversible constraints that eliminate subsets of these possibilities, thereby narrowing the
space of what remains attainable.
These eliminations are not arbitrary but are shaped by gradientsâĂŤenergetic, informational,
developmental, or contextualâĂŤthat bias which constraints are imposed and in what order. Over
time, the accumulation of such constraints produces a stable residue: an identity deﬁned not by
what the system could have been, but by what it can no longer be.
In this sense, identity emerges as the intersection of surviving possibilities, constituted through
a history of irreversible restriction rather than through any ﬁxed or intrinsic essence.
Spherepop provides a discrete, legible instantiation of this pattern. RSVP provides its continuous
ﬁeld-theoretic lifting. Biology supplies the empirical conﬁrmation that such structures are not
artiﬁcial constructs, but the default mode of existence for systems that persist in time.
I.7
Concluding Schema
Existence can therefore be stated formally as follows: a system exists as a world-bearing entity if
and only if it participates in a sequence of irreversible, authorized events that progressively constrain
its future under real gradients.
Intelligence is not an exception to this rule. It is a special case of it.
Systems that avoid constraint may compute indeﬁnitely, but they do not live. Systems that live
do so by spending possibility, and in doing so, they acquire a world.
32

References
[1] Heidegger, M. (1977). The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. Trans. W. Lovitt.
Harper & Row.
[2] Thomson, I. D. (2025). Heidegger on TechnologyâĂŹs Danger and Promise in the Age of AI.
Cambridge University Press.
[3] Dreyfus, H. L. (1992). What Computers Still CanâĂŹt Do. MIT Press.
[4] Joyal, A., Street, R., & Verity, D. (1996). Traced monoidal categories. Mathematical Proceedings
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 119(3), 447âĂŞ468.
[5] Milner, R. (1992). The Polyadic π-Calculus: A Tutorial. Logic and Algebra of Speciﬁcation.
[6] Prigogine, I. (1977). Self-Organization in Non-Equilibrium Systems. Wiley.
[7] Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuro-
science, 11, 127âĂŞ138.
[8] Levin, M. (2022). Technological approach to mind everywhere (TAME). Frontiers in Systems
Neuroscience.
[9] Winskel, G. (1987). Event structures. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 255, 325âĂŞ392.
[10] Varacca, D., & Winskel, G. (2006). Event structures and domains. Theoretical Computer
Science, 358(2âĂŞ3), 173âĂŞ199.
33

